[Amit Varma]: Before you listen to this episode of the scene in the unseen, I have a recommendation for
[Amit Varma]: you. Do check out Pulya Bazi hosted by Saurabh Chandra and Pranay Kotesane, two really good
[Amit Varma]: friends of mine. Kickass podcast in Hindi. It's amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Liberals, progressives, conservatives, libertarians. I have a problem with these labels. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: I have four problems with these labels. Problem one, they have changed meaning over time.
[Amit Varma]: The word liberal meant one thing in the 19th century and means quite another in the 21st.
[Amit Varma]: And it means different things in different parts of the world. For example, American
[Amit Varma]: liberals often have the opposite beliefs to European liberals and classical liberals and
[Amit Varma]: left liberals are often at loggerheads with one another. Problem two, the proper nouns
[Amit Varma]: often do not mean what the common noun does. For example, I meet too many liberals who
[Amit Varma]: are anything but liberal. So many progressives are certainly not progressive and many conservatives
[Amit Varma]: are actually quite radical. Problem three, these labels have acquired a tribal significance.
[Amit Varma]: And if you call yourself say libertarian, it is held as meaning that you belong to a
[Amit Varma]: tribe of people who call themselves libertarian and not that you believe in a certain set
[Amit Varma]: of values. And you then become part of the tribal warfare between liberals and conservatives
[Amit Varma]: and progressives and libertarians. And the discussion becomes heated and personal, degenerating
[Amit Varma]: to abuse rather than calm and rational revolving around values. Problem four, these labels
[Amit Varma]: are meaningless in an Indian context. Politics in India is not divided in the left right
[Amit Varma]: spectrum as it is in the West and identity politics dominates here. Though I did explore
[Amit Varma]: in episode 131 of the scene in the unseen, the theory that ideological fault lines do
[Amit Varma]: exist in Indian politics, but around different issues than in the West. And yet, here I am
[Amit Varma]: doing an episode called the Indian conservative. Why is this? Well, here's the thing. The scene
[Amit Varma]: in the unseen is basically driven by my intellectual curiosity about ideas and events. And over
[Amit Varma]: the last few months, I have been reexamining a prior belief I held about India, that there
[Amit Varma]: was no such thing as conservatism in India. I held the view that conservatism as it is
[Amit Varma]: in the West, say Burkean conservatism was missing in India, and that the term conservative
[Amit Varma]: was used as a respectable fig leaf by communal bigots who were simply indulging in identity
[Amit Varma]: politics. This is partly true, but I've come to realize that it's a simplistic view, and
[Amit Varma]: that there have been strains of conservative thought in India. And if we want to understand
[Amit Varma]: this country as it is today, we need to engage with it seriously and respectfully. My intellectual
[Amit Varma]: journey on the subject has partly taken place in public through various episodes of the
[Amit Varma]: scene in the unseen, in which I've spoken to guests like Aakar Patel, Suyash Rai, Rahul
[Amit Varma]: Verma and Akshay Mukul. Today, I take one more step in that journey with a fine author
[Amit Varma]: who has written an erudite book called the Indian conservative, which is therefore the
[Amit Varma]: subject of this episode, and of my continuing exploration of the hidden currents that drive
[Amit Varma]: our great nation.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Jayatit Rao, better known as Jerry
[Amit Varma]: Rao, who made his fortune as an IT entrepreneur and his name as a columnist in various national
[Amit Varma]: newspapers over a couple of decades. I thoroughly enjoyed reading his book, the Indian conservative,
[Amit Varma]: which defines conservatism, locates it in India's own traditions, rather than just to
[Amit Varma]: Western thought, and proposes and maps out two major strains of Indian conservatism in
[Amit Varma]: a formulation that was both new and thought provoking for me. The conversation you'll
[Amit Varma]: hear now is both combative and respectful, which brings me to an aside about a criticism
[Amit Varma]: some have leveled at me, that I do not invite guests who I disagree with. This is an absurd
[Amit Varma]: criticism, because I have had disagreements with every single guest I've had on the show,
[Amit Varma]: but always expressed in a civil way. Listeners used to the vituperative violence of social
[Amit Varma]: media may not even have realized that an argument was underway. This particular conversation
[Amit Varma]: was great fun for both Jerry and me. But before we go there, let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break. Hey, I want to thank Intel for supporting the scene and the unseen. If you haven't already,
[Amit Varma]: I recommend you check out Intel vPro. Intel vPro is a business platform that maximizes
[Amit Varma]: the performance of your company's computers. One of the ways in which it does this is through
[Amit Varma]: their active management technology, or AMT. AMT allows a company to discover, repair and
[Amit Varma]: manage computing assets. This means features like remote power on, set wake up times and
[Amit Varma]: schedule updates, see your infrastructure remotely even when it's down, recover faulty
[Amit Varma]: systems without sending a tech like I've seen work grind to a halt in companies when something
[Amit Varma]: is not working and tech support is taking forever to even show up. Intel's active management
[Amit Varma]: technology or AMT allows companies to sort these issues out super fast, remotely, you
[Amit Varma]: get to make the most of your time and resources. What's not to like? For more details, head
[Amit Varma]: on over to Intel dot i n slash vPro. That's v p r o Intel dot i n slash vPro. Keep it
[Amit Varma]: running. Keep it smooth. Jerry, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you so much
[Amit Varma]: Amit. Before we get down to talking about your book, The Indian Conservative, which
[Amit Varma]: I greatly enjoyed reading very thought provoking. Let's first talk a little bit about your personal
[Guest]: journey like what makes Jerry Rao, Jerry Rao? Well, I guess some relatively standard kind
[Guest]: of Indian middle class background on the 50s, 60s, 70s. My father was an official in the
[Guest]: government and he got transferred from place to place and we as a family moved with him
[Guest]: from place to place. We are South Indian originally from the state of Tamil Nadu, but we are not
[Guest]: Tamilians. We are Kannada speaking people. My family roots go back to Coimbatore. But
[Guest]: for more than 100 years now, 120 years, we've been in Madras. So Madras is where I finished
[Guest]: school and did my college. So that kind of gives you a smattering of Hindi, a smattering
[Guest]: of Tamil, a smattering of Kannada and pretty much otherwise English is the way and a little
[Guest]: bit of Sanskrit too in fairness. But that's pretty much the way one's linguistic narrative,
[Guest]: if you will, pans out. Conservative family, very traditional, religious, every single
[Guest]: religious festival occasion was observed, visited lots of temples as a child and as
[Guest]: a teenager. So from that perspective, very much rooted in things Indian, also in things
[Guest]: of the Raj, because my grandfathers, both of them were very much into English literature
[Guest]: and so and into an appreciation of the finer things of the British Raj. So that too came
[Guest]: through in the stuff. Oddly enough, oddly enough, since you ask, one of the incidents
[Guest]: that I've been remembering recently in different contexts is when our family went to Bhakra
[Guest]: in 1960, I think, and the dam was still being built. And my father, I remember telling us,
[Guest]: look, what a grand thing Panditji is building for us. So there was that whole sense of the
[Guest]: 1960s effervescent patriotism, the looking forward to a great future and all that and
[Guest]: pride and all that. So that too was very much part of my upbringing. After that, after college,
[Guest]: I went to business school, went to Ahmedabad, then got into banking and went around the
[Guest]: world and took a couple of years off, went back to university, University of Chicago,
[Guest]: then came back into banking, spent a lot of years in banking about 25 years, left in California
[Guest]: in 1998, and went into it. That was a 10 year stint in it. Then we sold off our company
[Guest]: and then I moved on. And since then, I've been an investor in a variety of companies,
[Guest]: including housing finance company, which I exited some time back, and a housing development
[Guest]: company where I'm still involved as a promoter.
[Amit Varma]: And what's your intellectual journey through this period? Like, like you'd mentioned when
[Amit Varma]: we had coffee before this, that you were a socialist in college.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, that is true.
[Amit Varma]: What was that journey like? How did you change? Was it that you were, you know, you did your
[Amit Varma]: MBA and you're out in the real world and you're mugged by reality, or?
[Guest]: I think definitely the socialist thing was very strong in my college days, I would say
[Guest]: age 16 through 20 time period. It was also remember the time when Vietnam War protests
[Guest]: were taking place all over the world, including in sleepy Madras. And the Berkeley and Paris
[Guest]: and all these things were, were very much part of the, the consciousness of people like
[Guest]: us. And in India, we had a charismatic leader who was nationalizing banks and troubling
[Guest]: Rajas. So, there was a, there was that wave of, of popular socialist feeling, which was
[Guest]: very much part of my consciousness and my, my interest. And I've written a poem somewhere
[Guest]: where I mentioned the fact that when we were young, we read Lenin's State and Revolution.
[Guest]: Kind of tells you something about the nature of the time. Over, I think it is not just
[Guest]: MBA and so on. It is over the years, gradually, with greater exposure to different kinds of
[Guest]: texts, different kinds of people, that conservatism, first, it was actually on the economic side,
[Guest]: a movement towards markets as being more consequentially efficient. But then I would say in the last
[Guest]: 30 odd years, it's been, or 25 years, it's been more from the moral side as to what,
[Guest]: what is appropriate for human beings, that the, the intellectual journey has, has taken
[Guest]: place the way it has. To some extent, I think, constantly reinforced by the fact that at
[Guest]: least for the last 20 odd years, yeah, no, maybe 25 years, I've been doing a lot of pilgrimages
[Guest]: and temple visits. And that somehow tends to reinforce a certain idea of India, and
[Guest]: a certain idea of what it is that one needs to conserve about India, about our own society,
[Guest]: and therefore what one needs to conserve about human beings in general.
[Amit Varma]: And who are the sort of thinkers who influenced you? Like, are there any, like, one question
[Amit Varma]: I often ask my guests is that, is there any book which changed the way you look at the
[Amit Varma]: world? Which is perhaps a little simplistic, they often won't be just one book, there'll
[Amit Varma]: be multiple books. But if I were to post it to you?
[Guest]: I think the most important influence, both from an aesthetic and a, and a kind of moral
[Guest]: perspective is T.S. Eliot. Because I think the development of Eliot between Wasteland
[Guest]: and Journey of the Magi, which is my favorite poem, I read it at least once or twice a month,
[Guest]: sometimes aloud. And for Quartets, kind of established for me that there is continuity
[Guest]: in what we as human beings do. And to snap that thread of continuity and to kind of do
[Guest]: something radical or revolutionary and break down and try to build anew is something that
[Guest]: I've started detesting quite a bit. So I would say Eliot. Initially, Eliot was a shock, as
[Guest]: what Hugh Hefner says, is a neurasthenic shock of reading Profrock. But over time, Eliot
[Guest]: was not. I remember once going to London and I visited St. Mary Woolnott Church. I went
[Guest]: down King William Street to where St. Mary Woolnott kept the hour. It's in Wasteland.
[Guest]: And then I went to the other church where there's Ionian white and gold. And then one
[Guest]: started getting a feel that, that in seeking to maintain continuity with tradition, Eliot
[Guest]: was trying to give us an extremely important lesson about, and he does it, of course, in
[Guest]: the aesthetic literary world. But I think it's equally applicable in the political,
[Guest]: social, aesthetic worlds. And the second influence, I would say, is Smith. Adam Smith, the early
[Guest]: Smith.
[Guest]: Moral sentiments.
[Guest]: Theory of moral sentiments. And this, I never knew about it, frankly. I, like everyone else,
[Guest]: one read or one skimmed through Wealth of Nations and quoted one sentence from it. That's
[Guest]: the way Standard Economics 101 works. But several years ago, 10, 15 years ago, I was
[Guest]: at a longish meeting with Professor Amartya Sen when he kind of directed me to go and
[Guest]: read Theory of Moral Sentiments, which subsequently, of course, I did. And it opened up. The fact
[Guest]: that it was published a decade earlier than The Wealth of Nations and precedes it, and
[Guest]: in fact is the foundation for the later capitalism that Smith developed, struck me. Again, this
[Guest]: whole thing that ideas evolve. That is, Bacon says something, somebody else says something,
[Guest]: you build on what Bacon says. You know, it's not, it's not something that comes in a sui
[Guest]: generis at one particular point in time. So that's the thing that I kind of saw in Smith's
[Guest]: evolution and that there is a moral purpose to markets, which is much more than the consequentialist
[Guest]: efficiency, which the Butcher Baker quotation talks about. I would say in recent times in
[Guest]: the last 10 years, Scruton, Roger Scruton, Roger Scruton has been important because he's
[Guest]: defending a society which is, actually, I wrote this about Naipaul too. I don't know,
[Guest]: you can go back and look at one of the essays I wrote in the Indian Express several years
[Guest]: ago when I was talking about Naipaul, comparing him where he is talking about the decline
[Guest]: of modern civilization, particularly Western civilization, comparing him to a kind of Latin
[Guest]: epigramist living in Tuscany in the year 409 AD, one year before Rome was sacked by Alaric.
[Guest]: So there's this sense of foreboding that Naipaul, as a great conservative, has that in not preserving
[Guest]: and in not building on what we have inherited from humans and trying to jettison that, we
[Guest]: make great mistakes. And Scruton is very much at the center of that, at least as far as
[Guest]: England is concerned. Because the Church of England is in decline, church music is in
[Guest]: decline. Shakespeare is no longer fashionable. People don't care about common law. All the
[Guest]: things that matter to keeping the English traditions going are what Scruton talks about.
[Guest]: But it's not completely dead. The important thing is they're in decline, they're under
[Guest]: assault, but I think they'll come back. And there is a sense of optimism also, if you
[Guest]: see in my book, at the end of it, that it's not completely over. John Major made a very
[Guest]: interesting statement, I think when, which the cricket commentator John Arlott died,
[Guest]: Major said, English summers will never be the same again. You know, it's a way of kind
[Guest]: of keeping in touch with and to some extent, conservatism is an outlook, it's an approach.
[Guest]: It's less an ideology.
[Amit Varma]: What I'm then going to do since you brought Scruton up is I'm actually going to quote
[Amit Varma]: from one of his recent books on conservatism. And I have a question for you based on that.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I initially thought that we'll talk about the roots of conservatism starting from
[Amit Varma]: Burke onwards, and we'll get to that. But since you brought up Scruton, he makes a point
[Amit Varma]: in his book, which is a point that you have also made at length in yours, which is I'll
[Amit Varma]: quote him, conservatism is not by nature an international cause. It takes its character
[Amit Varma]: from local questions, and the loves and suspicions that thrive in specific places and times,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And then he goes on to say, conservatives believe, quote, the root of politics is settlement.
[Amit Varma]: This is he's put in italics, settlement, the motive in human beings that binds them to
[Amit Varma]: the place, the customs, the history and the people that are theirs, stop quote. And these
[Amit Varma]: concerns come out in what you just said about how, you know, English culture is declining
[Amit Varma]: in these various ways you pointed out. And that, but that is a lament, which it also
[Amit Varma]: seems to me it might be said, it's a two part, it's one observation and a question. And the
[Amit Varma]: observation is, it might be said that that is a lament of Scruton and people like him
[Amit Varma]: is not necessarily a lament of England, because England itself has changed partly through
[Amit Varma]: immigration, much as America has been completely transformed through immigration. And the danger
[Amit Varma]: that a conservative might make there is hold on to a notion of it, which is an archaic
[Amit Varma]: notion. And just because they value a particular aspect of it doesn't mean that others who
[Amit Varma]: come from different traditions necessarily do. And my question really is about the local
[Amit Varma]: nature of conservatism, as you stress, and through most of history, individuals have
[Amit Varma]: had one geography, that's the place around them, the town where they live, or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: it's a physical geography. But today, it could be said that we all inhabit many different
[Amit Varma]: geographies that are not bound by physical space. Like, my neighbours are not just those
[Amit Varma]: who live in the flat next door in Bombay, but they are also people who are on the same
[Amit Varma]: WhatsApp group with me from across the world, or whatever. And therefore, my traditions
[Amit Varma]: are not just the traditions are imbibed from the physical spaces around me or the physical
[Amit Varma]: culture in those physical spaces, but also from the whole globe, I mean, with what technology
[Guest]: has done. So as a conservative, how do you respond to that?
[Guest]: Yeah, let's, let's, of all the things you've said, the one word that I would kind of really
[Guest]: object to is the word archaic, which is said in a kind of derogatory manner.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not saying it's archaic. I'm saying it might be archaic. That's what I meant, just
[Guest]: to clarify.
[Guest]: But my point is, so be it. The Magna Carta is archaic, Shakespeare is archaic, Handel
[Guest]: is archaic. So do we therefore, very soon, the Beatles may be seen as archaic. So do
[Guest]: we therefore jettison? And this is what Eliot, that's why I started with Eliot. Eliot goes
[Guest]: back to Donne. He goes back to earlier metaphysical poets, goes back to Dante. In fact, he goes
[Guest]: back all the way to Radharani Kopanishad, to go back to the kind of human continuity,
[Guest]: the chain of continuity, where there's a gradual development evolution. So I think, yes, England
[Guest]: is changing. England is not today what it was 500 years ago. A hundred years ago, it
[Guest]: is not what it was 400 years ago. Nobody is saying that there is no change. The only concern
[Guest]: is in the course of change, are we abandoning good things? If we abandon bad things, that's
[Guest]: perfectly fine with conservatives, as Desirelius, Burke, Scruton have all said in different
[Guest]: contexts. But if we give up, who will be the loser if we give up? If tomorrow we are no
[Guest]: longer able to sing Tyagaraja Kritis in the ragas that he composed them in, who is the
[Guest]: loser? You can say, hey, that's archaic. But our view is, hey, it's worth defending. By
[Guest]: calling it archaic, you can't dismiss it. In fact, we think the old has special value.
[Guest]: What was the second question you were asking around that?
[Amit Varma]: I'll come back to it. Let me kind of sort of respond to this to clarify sort of what
[Amit Varma]: I meant. And I'm not, again, talking about reform and political changes and so on, just
[Amit Varma]: in the realm of culture, for example. Let's say that the Englishman I'm thinking of is
[Amit Varma]: a second generation Bangladeshi immigrant. His parents immigrated to London or Suffolk
[Amit Varma]: or wherever, they set up a restaurant, he runs a restaurant. So that's a stereotype.
[Amit Varma]: He does whatever there. But he considers himself English. He's born and brought up in England.
[Amit Varma]: He speaks a language. He is an Englishman. He'll even cheer for the England cricket team.
[Amit Varma]: But he doesn't listen to Handel. Maybe he listens to Pawan Das Ball, right? Or he listens
[Amit Varma]: to whatever he wants to, which is a question of individual choice. And maybe in a certain
[Amit Varma]: sense, he's a cultural conservative that he's preserving those elements of his culture.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, from that point of view, it could be argued that, say, Scruton's lament
[Amit Varma]: that Handel is not being listened to is perfectly legitimate as a personal lament. But can it
[Amit Varma]: be a lament on behalf of society itself?
[Guest]: I think the Bangladeshi immigrant, who is now an English person, would actually be better
[Guest]: off, is my personal view, not forgetting the Baul music at all, but by greater acquaintanceship
[Guest]: with Handel, because he is living in a country to which Handel is given so much. And I think
[Guest]: that is important. For instance, you and I live in what's now called Mumbai, used to
[Guest]: be called Bombay. I think it only helps us to be sensitive, enthusiastic, involved in
[Guest]: Ganpati festivals or in the Varkari annual pilgrimage, because we are here. It doesn't
[Guest]: mean you forget whatever Hindi literature you're acquainted with, or I forget Tamil
[Guest]: or Kannada, but it behooves us, to Scruton's point, to be part of the landscape where we
[Guest]: are. And I think this is an important... Yes, and the landscape changes. I'm not saying
[Guest]: it doesn't change. Bombay was Kalachuri, then it was Adil Shahi, then it was Mughal maybe
[Guest]: for some time, then it was Portuguese, and it was British, and now it's Free India. So
[Guest]: it's changed. But that doesn't mean that certain things, for instance, if you do live here,
[Guest]: to be enchanted by Elephanta, by the Maheshamurthy there, I think is part of... You can't simply
[Guest]: say, oh, I've come from a foreign place, I'm only going to be interested in things thousand
[Guest]: miles away. I think you lose out. And that's the point that Scruton is making, that in
[Guest]: not associating with a... And your point you made, I'll come back to that, the virtual
[Guest]: and the physical. Yes, conservatives are very much into physical. We love architecture.
[Guest]: We're very much into landscapes, forests. I wrote many years ago that if you don't love
[Guest]: water bodies, lakes, rivers, waterfalls, forests, mountains, hills, then you don't love India,
[Guest]: because that's what the country is all about. So the physical thing is extremely important.
[Guest]: And I think conservatives would feel profoundly, profoundly anxious if somebody is going to
[Guest]: spend the whole day sitting on a laptop, talking to people thousands of miles away digitally,
[Guest]: and not be concerned much about the physical landscape around him or her. That would upset
[Guest]: us. So yes, the digital world is real, you can't run away from it. But we would hope
[Guest]: that there'd be a balance and a return to appreciating the immediate physical.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. Let's kind of get back on track and talk a little bit about Burke. What does
[Amit Varma]: conservatism mean to you? And, you know...
[Guest]: Okay, Burke, you know, is always... Everybody calls himself a Burkean conservatism. Burke
[Guest]: is always quoted. I even mentioned somewhere in the book that Ambedkar quoted Burke in
[Guest]: his great speech in our constituent assembly. The reason Burke is fascinating is that he
[Guest]: called it right on the French Revolution. He said that this is going to result in a
[Guest]: military dictatorship sooner or later. This is going to result in a permanent hundred
[Guest]: year wound on the French psyche. You're destroying Notre Dame Cathedral and calling it Temple
[Guest]: of Reason. You're really making breaks in the continuous change of French culture, going
[Guest]: back to, you know, French and country of France is more than 1066. English talk 1066. France
[Guest]: is, I think, 400 AD or something. There's continuity there. And exactly what happened.
[Guest]: You got Napoleon, and you got a military dictatorship, and you got an imperialist war machine. And
[Guest]: the wounds that the French have inflicted on themselves have remained. He called it
[Guest]: right on the American colonies. Strangely enough, you would think he would... Being
[Guest]: conservative, he should have opposed their independence. In fact, he took the other position.
[Guest]: He said these people have left England in order to live as colonists, and we have given
[Guest]: them charters. Commonwealth of Massachusetts has a charter. Commonwealth of New York has
[Guest]: a charter. And now you're violating that charter by imposing taxes, by doing stuff. And he
[Guest]: called it right on India. That I never knew till I read O'Brien. O'Brien has a whole chapter
[Guest]: on this. Because not everybody knows about Burke's impeachment of Warren Hastings and
[Guest]: that he was therefore opposed to the perfidies and the excesses and the plunder involved
[Guest]: in harassing the Begum Zawahud or the Raja Banaras Jait Singh and so on. But the fact
[Guest]: that Burke had some very concrete ideas on India. First of all, he said this silly thing
[Guest]: that we can break everything in India and not pay attention to their traditions is ridiculous.
[Guest]: He said that's a recipe for disaster. And sure enough, that's what happened when we
[Guest]: had the 1857 uprising when you kind of ignored the traditions of the country. Two, he was
[Guest]: in favor of directly the House of Commons supervising India. He didn't like this idea
[Guest]: of the king and the prime minister having a secretary of state for India. And certainly
[Guest]: he didn't like the idea of a company, East India Company, running a whole country. And
[Guest]: if that had happened, imagine if you had had five or 10 parliamentary commissioners supervising
[Guest]: the India office in London. And through them, the governor general here, etc. They would
[Guest]: have been answerable to local public opinion in England. They would have been on with changes.
[Guest]: Whereas what happened subsequently in India was an ICS officer would come and stay here
[Guest]: for 30 years. So he would only be acquainted with the intellectual currents of 30 years
[Guest]: earlier. He didn't know what was changing or forget intellectual currency, technological,
[Guest]: any changes that are taking place in the world. So we got a kind of a frozen bureaucracy,
[Guest]: and one that was very heavy handed, ruled through the secretary of state, which was
[Guest]: the cabinet office. And George III actually and Pitt opposed Burke because they wanted
[Guest]: to keep the patronage to themselves. They didn't want to give it over to the parliamentary
[Guest]: commissioners, which was a pity. So Burke had thought through some of these things,
[Guest]: even vis-a-vis India, with great patience and with great, you know, kind of intellectual
[Guest]: agility. So when I read O'Brien, then I went back, and I went to my favorite bookshop in
[Guest]: New York, Hagersee, and got the complete works of Burke, which I have with me, and started
[Guest]: reading here and there in different bits and pieces. And one started understanding that
[Guest]: this man was not a Bacon or a Locke. He was not a philosopher in that sense. He was more
[Guest]: of a practical, empirical guy saying, hey, this doesn't make much sense what you're trying
[Guest]: to do. And this is not a very noble thing that you're trying to do. I mean, that's the
[Guest]: way he approached discussions. Then when I read Nicholas Philipson's book on Adam Smith,
[Guest]: I came across a brilliant thing, which I hadn't come across earlier, which was in I think
[Guest]: Quartly Review or Edinburgh Review, Burke reviewed Adam Smith's theory of moral sentiments,
[Guest]: book review. And this Philipson quotes extensively, Nicholas Philipson quotes extensively in his
[Guest]: book. And that's where I came across this expression, wisdom of the swain. You know,
[Guest]: Burke basically said, hey, common people are wise. This idea that these intellectuals sitting
[Guest]: in Oxford, Cambridge are wise and common people are stupid or something. And it's a very continental
[Guest]: idea. The professor in France or Germany has supreme knowledge and the peasants don't know
[Guest]: anything kind of. It's very much opposed to the Burkean conservative view.
[Amit Varma]: So, let me try and summarize Burke's central insight and tell me if I've got it right,
[Amit Varma]: which is, I mean, an insight I more or less agree with, which is that traditions and ways
[Amit Varma]: of behavior of a place evolve for certain reasons, because they are concomitant with
[Amit Varma]: human nature, because they reflect what works and what doesn't work. And if we are to make
[Amit Varma]: a radical shift from this, you know, it causes a violence in society that can lead to trouble
[Amit Varma]: much as the French Revolution. And therefore, Burke's point is that change is by all means
[Amit Varma]: good. Let's stick to what's good about the past. Let's discard what is bad about the
[Amit Varma]: past, but let's change gradually and not cause these fundamental shocks and dislocations.
[Amit Varma]: And like you sum it up, I'll quote you now from your book, quote, in our view, by which
[Amit Varma]: you mean in conservatives view, quote, in our view, the principle challenged faced by
[Amit Varma]: societies is how to change constructively without losing things of value in the process
[Amit Varma]: of change. Therefore, in principle, we are opposed to revolutionary change, preferring
[Amit Varma]: the evolutionary variety any day. Correct. That's a that's a correct. This is absolutely
[Guest]: see the nobody is saying that because there was slavery in the past, we should continue
[Guest]: with it. Slavery has to go. Now, that is for sure. Or, you know, burda or burning of women
[Guest]: or dowry or whatever. There are there are innumerable things that have to change. The
[Guest]: question is, when you do something abruptly and when you do something wholesale, first
[Guest]: of all, there's violence, which has unintended consequences, usually which are bad. Very
[Guest]: rarely does violence have unintended consequences, which are good. Secondly, you lose the good
[Guest]: things associated with the past. And that's the concern that constantly bothers conservatives
[Guest]: is that. And that's why it's in my book. Later on, I say it. The best thing that happened
[Guest]: to us was the way our independence happened. For three years, we actually remained a dominion.
[Guest]: We didn't even become a republic. We it took place gradually, evolutionary step by step
[Guest]: by step. It didn't happen. Whereas in 1917 in Russia or 1949 in China, it happened of
[Guest]: a bitter civil war with with great violence and with a complete rupture with the past.
[Guest]: You kill off the entire king and his entire royal family in brutal manner and all that
[Guest]: kind of stuff. It didn't help them in the long run. It actually hurt those societies.
[Guest]: And by writing our constitution in English, by using the Government of India Act of 1935
[Guest]: as the basis, by accepting principles of English common law as a basis. Indian Constitution,
[Guest]: by the way, is the only constitution in the world which has a specific article which allows
[Guest]: the Supreme Court to intervene in the interests of equity. When the letter of the law doesn't
[Guest]: achieve equity, the Supreme Court can intervene. Equity is a very basic seven, eight hundred
[Guest]: year old English common law concept. So, we've kept the traditions of the Raj and we've built
[Guest]: on it. Now, we've changed many things. Now, there are no Rao Bahadurs or Sirs or things
[Guest]: of the Raj used to give out. I'm not saying we kept everything of the Raj, but we managed
[Guest]: to do this in an evolutionary step by step constitutional manner where could have approved.
[Amit Varma]: It could also, of course, be argued that we kept things like the Indian Penal Code with
[Amit Varma]: the sedition law and the anti-free speech laws like 254 and 153A.
[Guest]: Yeah, the law on homosexuality. I mean, see, the Indian Penal Code is a very... See, one
[Guest]: of the things I've mentioned somewhere is that... Now, we don't know for a fact whether
[Guest]: Manusmriti was actually used or it was simply a ideal text that was referred to. But under
[Guest]: Manusmriti, the same crime committed by persons of different caste origins would have different
[Guest]: punishments. Indian Penal Code doesn't have that. It's quite clear that a murder is a
[Guest]: murder. It is a crime that is punished and it is not... The cost of the individual is
[Guest]: irrelevant. So, it has those good features. It has features associated with 19th century
[Guest]: social thinking on homosexuality or on sedition which need to change. And I think the way
[Guest]: to do it again is the way we've done it. Do it by passing a law, having a select committee,
[Guest]: sit, talk about it, discuss, debate, change the law or go through an elaborate judicial
[Guest]: process and let the court rule. You know, that's the way to do it, not by having a revolutionary
[Guest]: change, one fine day saying we will get rid of this. Because then, the whole Penal Code,
[Guest]: if you throw out, you throw out also some of the good things that are there.
[Amit Varma]: Right. I'll come back to that a little later. I want to move to another question now, since
[Amit Varma]: we are discussing what conservatism is and what Burke's fundamental insight was. I want
[Amit Varma]: to quote from someone who is my intellectual hero, Frederick Hayek. And he's written this
[Amit Varma]: famous essay you must have read called, Why I am not a conservative. So, I'll just quote
[Amit Varma]: a bit from that. He, of course, at the time called himself a liberal, but that was in
[Amit Varma]: the classical sense, in the European sense, a classical liberal. Today, he'd be called
[Amit Varma]: a libertarian and basically both labels, which I think more or less would apply to me to
[Amit Varma]: avoid labels. But here's what Hayek has to say in his essay, Why I am not a conservative.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, Let me now state what seems to me the decisive objection to any conservatism which
[Amit Varma]: deserves to be called such. It is that by its very nature, it cannot offer an alternative
[Amit Varma]: to the direction in which we are moving. It may succeed by its resistance to current tendencies
[Amit Varma]: in slowing down undesirable developments, but since it does not indicate another direction,
[Amit Varma]: it cannot prevent their continuance. It has for this reason invariably been the fate of
[Amit Varma]: conservatism to be dragged along a path not of its own choosing. Stop quote. And my question
[Amit Varma]: here is, I mean, I know what you've clarified multiple times in your book is that conservatives
[Amit Varma]: don't merely want to stop change. They want to change gradually and they want to keep
[Amit Varma]: what's best of the past. So, I get that. I'm anticipating that you're going to say that.
[Amit Varma]: But my deeper sort of question and my genuine puzzlement is that if the central insight
[Amit Varma]: of conservatism is about the means of affecting change, what about the ends? If I ask a conservative,
[Amit Varma]: what are your ends? What are they? You know, and you will get different answers from different
[Amit Varma]: people. You would, of course, also talk about individual rights and so on. But then the
[Amit Varma]: question is that if conservatism is centered around not changing things abruptly, then
[Guest]: where do you actually draw your ends from? Okay, let's start with Hayek now. It's a very
[Guest]: continental view of the world where there's a linear theory of historical progress. And
[Guest]: so progress is happening and conservatives are being dragged because progress is going
[Guest]: to happen anyway. Now, we are very, very skeptical about this because this is the thing that
[Guest]: keeps promising utopia, promising some great progress and therefore don't hold it back,
[Guest]: which ties up with your question about ends. Actually, conservatives do not have a very
[Guest]: strong view on ends because we do reject the idea of a utopian end. And we reject the idea
[Guest]: of perfection. So things will not be perfect. Yes, incrementally, there will be less hunger
[Guest]: than today. Tomorrow, we hope there will be more freedom for men and women than today.
[Guest]: Will there be perfect freedom? Will there be an end? Answer is no. So in fact, the means
[Guest]: are the end. There is no such thing as working towards a superordinate goal that comes at
[Guest]: the end of the rainbow. That's rejected completely because utopias are the scariest thing for
[Guest]: conservatives because for two reasons. In a consequential sense, most attempts to get
[Guest]: to utopia lead to dystopias. And that's a fact in history we've seen. In a more fundamental
[Guest]: moral sense, religious conservatives would take the position that it is not up to human
[Guest]: beings to make heaven on earth. That is God's role. And non-religious conservatives would
[Guest]: take the position that such a paradise on earth is neither possible nor feasible and
[Guest]: its pursuit will only result in hubris. So that would be my response to the Hayek observation
[Amit Varma]: and your question about ends. That's fair enough. No, I entirely agree with
[Amit Varma]: you that chasing utopias normally leads to dystopia. But let me sort of try to elaborate
[Amit Varma]: on where I'm coming from. For me, where I derive my view of the world is not from a
[Amit Varma]: view of history proceeding in a certain direction or that the world should be like this, a particular
[Amit Varma]: end state. I rather derive it from a set of values which holds individual rights to be
[Amit Varma]: paramount above all else. And therefore, I want the world to move towards a position
[Amit Varma]: where the consent of every individual is respected more and there is less and less coercion.
[Amit Varma]: That's sort of the directional movement that I would like to see.
[Guest]: We would not agree. You know, for us, the fact is rights and obligations are intertwined.
[Guest]: The idea that right exists, rights for people exist in isolation of their obligations to
[Guest]: other human beings, to environment, et cetera, is not something that conservatives would
[Guest]: easily accept. The second issue really is that things like particularly in the area
[Guest]: of rights, the in recent times, the liberal position, unfortunately, has moved away beyond
[Guest]: individual rights, to communal rights, to community rights, group rights.
[Amit Varma]: I think that if I may interrupt that again, I think depends on because the meaning of
[Guest]: the word liberal has been changed and appropriated. Okay, so you're really talking about the left
[Guest]: liberals, non-classical liberals. And that, of course, conservatives are very petrified
[Guest]: about. No, I opposed it as much as you got. No, I'm telling you why we are petrified about
[Guest]: because we actually want associative things. We are for associative things. But again,
[Guest]: from a perspective of common traditions, from a perspective of band of brothers coming together,
[Guest]: from a perspective of social transactions, trust, the danger with these group rights,
[Guest]: if you will, is that they become pathological at some stage. And that's what conservatives
[Guest]: are so scared of. But coming back to your earlier issue, the idea of a right, which
[Guest]: is not intertwined with an obligation or a duty, it just won't fly with virtually anything.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So let me respond to both of those. I mean, first, as far as your aversion to
[Amit Varma]: group rights is concerned, mine is no less, because group rights and individual rights
[Amit Varma]: can't coexist and group rights always go hand in hand with coercion. But equally, I'm again
[Amit Varma]: for associative behavior, as long as it is voluntary. Again, that's the consent coercion
[Amit Varma]: thing. Actually, no sovereign state intervention. As for rights versus obligations, I think
[Amit Varma]: in the Lockean view of rights, which I subscribe to, I think rights do come with obligations.
[Amit Varma]: But the only obligation I will accept is the obligation to respect the corresponding rights
[Amit Varma]: of others. Because only in that situation do your own rights have any meaning. But that
[Amit Varma]: clarification aside, I don't actually want to harangue you. Because honestly, your book
[Amit Varma]: was just a wonderful read. I learned a lot from it also about, you know, about the development
[Amit Varma]: of conservatism in India, things which I didn't know before you showed me a new lens to look
[Amit Varma]: at it. So I will save my thorny questions for the end, the rest of them. And let's kind
[Amit Varma]: of go back to your book. And an interesting statement you make early in the book is, you
[Amit Varma]: point out that, quote, conservatism in India is not purely or entirely an imported intellectual
[Amit Varma]: conceit, you say, quote, its antecedents are both universal and Indian. Two of our civilization's
[Amit Varma]: foundational text, the Shanti Parva of the Mahabharata and the Tirukkural of Tiruvalluvar
[Amit Varma]: can be seen as providing the enduring basis of Indian conservatism. And a little later,
[Amit Varma]: you talk about the Telugu poet Alasi Peddana. And you talk about, yeah, sorry, my bad for
[Amit Varma]: the pronunciation. And you point out how he quote, dealt with concerns that are uncannily
[Amit Varma]: similar to those of Scruton today. So elaborate a little bit on that.
[Guest]: You see, the first of all, the Orientalist view that Indian intellectual traditions are
[Guest]: ascetic and otherworldly, etc. is comprehensively dismissed, if you look at the Shanti Parva
[Guest]: and the Tirukkural, which I believe both constitute, I use the word foundational texts, very advisedly,
[Guest]: I believe that they are very, very central to our whole Weltanschauung. They both incidentally
[Guest]: are interested in the three vargas, the three Purusharthas. In Sanskrit, you would call
[Guest]: them Artha, Dharma, and Kama. Artha is the pursuit of political and economic activity.
[Guest]: Dharma is pursuit of virtue and ethics. Kama is a pursuit of pleasure and sensory stuff
[Guest]: and aesthetic sensibility. It's called Porul Aram and Inmam in Tirukkural. The interesting
[Guest]: thing that both texts kind of glide over, they acknowledge that the fourth salvation,
[Guest]: the fourth goal, Moksha, for human beings is the most important and transcends these
[Guest]: three. But the implicit assumption is you get these three right, salvation is automatically
[Guest]: taken care of. So, so much for accusing Indians of being otherworldly. Neither is Valluvar
[Guest]: otherworldly, nor is Vyasa in the Shanti Parva otherworldly. The second thing that they are
[Guest]: both focused on is how should an individual pursue Artha, Dharma, and Kama, Porul Aram
[Guest]: and Inmam, and how should he or she pursue this in society. So, that's for conservatives,
[Guest]: the second part is very important. We do not see ourselves as isolated, autonomous people,
[Guest]: but as people in a band of brothers or sisters. And the focus is in both rights and obligations,
[Guest]: therefore. The focus is on the sober pursuit of wealth. Sober is as important as pursuit.
[Guest]: Virtuous pursuit of wealth and political power, and a balanced pursuit of the aesthetic sensibility
[Guest]: with, imbued with ethics. And then there's extensive discussion on the importance of
[Guest]: the ploughman in Valluvar. Valluvar, the central figure for Valluvar, by the way, is not the
[Guest]: merchant or soldier or the king, but it's the ploughman. Because, you know, and I mentioned
[Guest]: it somewhere, it's almost, it's like, you know, Pierce Ploughman Langman's poem, it's
[Guest]: almost as if Valluvar anticipates it by a thousand years. The pursuit of activity in
[Guest]: a meaningful way, and in a social context. Now, in the Shanti Parvat, there's a lot of
[Guest]: discussion of Rajadharma. What is the appropriate virtuous conduct for a king? So everybody
[Guest]: says before Magna Carta was written in England, the king was above the law. That was the first
[Guest]: time that the king was brought under the law. It's not true. Shanti Parvat is quite clear.
[Guest]: The king is subject to a royal law that he has to follow. Then there is this concern
[Guest]: about Nyaya, about the fact that you need justice and you need a social milieu in which
[Guest]: justice and good conduct prevails. For the ancient Indian scholars, the most horrifying
[Guest]: thought was Matsya Nyaya. Matsya Nyaya is where the big fish eat the small fish. It's
[Guest]: a breakdown of law and order. It's a breakdown of order in society. For them, that has to
[Guest]: be the most horrifying times in life. It's like Hobbes, almost, you know, before order
[Guest]: comes, how it is, how brutish, nasty it is. So this anticipation of so many of these conservative
[Guest]: ideas going back, and there is one which in fact predates even the Mahabharata and the
[Guest]: Kural, which goes back all the way to the Apasthma Sutra, the Vajra Veda, which is Yogadharma,
[Guest]: which comes to your point or Hayek's point about progress. What Yogadharma is an idea
[Guest]: that different ages have different dharmas. Now, if you were living 2000 years, 3000 years
[Guest]: ago in ancient Athens, and slavery was prevalent, what would be your advice to a slave? Be an
[Guest]: obedient slave. Now, that doesn't make it right or wrong or fashionable, but that was
[Guest]: appropriate for that time. And your advice to the master would be, treat your slave kindly.
[Guest]: But 2000 years later, you say, no, let's abolish slavery. You know, it's a different, this
[Guest]: is a different age. In a particular age, in an age before the birth control pill was invented,
[Guest]: you know, there was a certain level of freedom that women couldn't aspire to. Now, if that
[Guest]: has changed, if technology provides for certain things, you have to automatically make the
[Guest]: change that that provides. So, Yogadharma is another one, which is very, very central
[Guest]: to, particularly to the idea, you know, in Conningsby, which is one of the Israeli's
[Guest]: famous novels, he mentions that we have to gradually change without abandoning the best
[Guest]: in the past. And that's what Yogadharma is about. There are certain aspects of dharma
[Guest]: that do not change. You know, right conduct, speaking the truth, those are eternal verities.
[Guest]: But certain aspects do change, and you must be willing to make. And I think Raja Ram Mohan
[Guest]: Roy frankly understood that. He understood that, that is why he is such an important
[Guest]: figure in modern Indian conservatism. He understood that we had to discard some old practices.
[Guest]: And he did it very cleverly. He simply said, they're not in keeping with the spirit of
[Guest]: our own scriptures. It's kind of a very clever, dexterous way of doing it. But this Yogadharma
[Guest]: is also very much there in our texts. Lastly, which is something that we may come back to
[Guest]: in later discussions, I do pay some attention to the Atharva Veda, where we are, when we
[Guest]: talk about conserving the environment, which is a very central idea in Indian thought,
[Guest]: and what it means. In fact, Burke has made a brilliant speech on that subject in the
[Guest]: House of Commons, not when he was talking about Warren Hastings impeachment, when he
[Guest]: was talking about the Prince of Arcot's debts. Prince of Arcot's debts are a very funny and
[Guest]: very sad set of events in Indian history. We can talk about that offline. But anyway,
[Guest]: while talking about that, Burke refers to the fact that Indian kings built canals, reservoirs,
[Guest]: created lakes, knowing full well that they would not enjoy them. But they were for the
[Guest]: enjoyment of future generations. So there was an intergenerational kind of trust and
[Guest]: transaction there. And Burke talks about it. So he knew enough about India to be able to
[Amit Varma]: say, to refer to that kind of detail.
[Amit Varma]: So let's let's sort of come to relatively modern times, by which I mean the last 200
[Amit Varma]: years or so. And one of the interesting things I sort of discovered in your book was you
[Amit Varma]: present this lens of looking at Indian conservatism, where you say that it's not one thing. There
[Amit Varma]: are two very distinct strands, which are running through Indian conservatism. And one of them,
[Amit Varma]: of course, is the Raja Ram Mohan Roy strand, which is sort of more inspired by Burke. Tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about both these strands. I mean, let's start with Raja Ram Mohan Roy.
[Guest]: Raja Ram Mohan Roy, one of his most important statements he made to a visiting Frenchman
[Guest]: was that he wanted British rule to continue for a long time. So here is a man saying something
[Guest]: very important saying, let's not get rid of the British that easily. Let us learn from
[Guest]: them. Let us imbibe what is good and not be in a hurry for some kind of quick revolutionary
[Guest]: uprising and change. He would have opposed the 1857 uprising, for instance. And he died
[Guest]: before that, so we can't say for sure, but I would suspect that he would have. And he
[Guest]: was also for making sure we maintain continuity with our own traditions. So Upanishads, in
[Guest]: Brahmo Samaj, he reintroduces or introduces Upanishadic prayers. So he did not see a contradiction
[Guest]: in getting the best out of the Raj traditions and getting the best out of ancient Indian
[Guest]: traditions and building on them for constructive, slow, constitutional, evolutionary change.
[Guest]: How did he ask for change? He wrote a letter to the Governor General. He got signatures.
[Guest]: He didn't go and, you know, beat up and have a revolutionary attack. No, he petitioned
[Guest]: in triplicate. Correct. Absolutely. That's I know it sounds boring. It doesn't sound
[Guest]: romantic. Revolutionaries are always romantic, but this is boring. This is discussions, debates,
[Guest]: treaties, petitions, signatures. But that's what results in enduring change and in constructive
[Guest]: change, which does not kind of destroy other stuff while making the change that one wants
[Guest]: to. He got rid of sati, he got rid of many other things. He was very much in favor of
[Guest]: English language. Although he was a scholar of Persian Sanskrit, et cetera. He realized
[Guest]: that in in the Raj, we had this opportunity. And so he wanted English education. So the
[Guest]: joy represents this bundle of patriotism, pride in the country, pragmatism, empiricism,
[Guest]: all of the things that we like in and above all, continuity, slow evolutionary, proper
[Guest]: insightful progress. And I think there is a direct kind of, you know, lying down from
[Guest]: him to various conservatives right through. And Bhandarkar clearly is in that Yadunath
[Guest]: Sarkar, is in that league and comes down all the way to Rajagopalachari and Masani in the
[Guest]: second half of the 20th century. So there is in the political side and frankly, on the
[Guest]: aesthetic side, there is also with with it coming down through Kumaraswamy and so on.
[Guest]: This idea that we need to keep this balance between the Upanishads and modern learning.
[Guest]: It's not one or the other, you know, many, many people felt it was one or the other.
[Guest]: In fact, I've argued that instead of decrying English and accusing English speaking Indians
[Guest]: of being Macaulay Putras and so on, we should look at Macaulay, who was actually fairly
[Guest]: vain and conceited and foolish fellow in many other respects. But he did us a favor. It's
[Guest]: the way we should look at it. Like Hrishyashringa, I don't know if you remember in Valmiki Ramayana,
[Guest]: he's the man who does the yajna and Rama is born. So he gave us the great prince of our
[Guest]: land Rama. So similarly, Macaulay, for whatever stupid reasons of his own, has given us this
[Guest]: great gift of English, which instead of kind of getting het up and worked up about and
[Guest]: having an inferiority complex about, we need to understand its value. And we need to see
[Guest]: it as part of the continuity. There is no discontinuity there.
[Amit Varma]: I would say English has been an Indian language for more than a century now. I did an episode
[Amit Varma]: with the historian Manu Pillay and he pointed out how when the Indian National Congress
[Amit Varma]: met for the first time in 1886 or whatever year it was, 1885, that, you know, people
[Amit Varma]: came from all over, they were dressed in all kinds of clothes, but the one common thing,
[Amit Varma]: the one condition practically for being part of the gathering is that you knew English,
[Amit Varma]: otherwise, how would you converse? So it was almost as if the British gave us that common
[Amit Varma]: thread. I want to come back to exploring in much more detail the Raja Ram Mohan Roy strand
[Amit Varma]: as it were, but for the benefit of our listeners, before we come back to that, can you also
[Guest]: talk a little bit about the second strand and what it is, which is about
[Guest]: There is a second strand in Indian conservatism and most leftists do not like to admit it
[Guest]: or do not, or I think just by, they feel that just by dismissing it, it will go away or
[Guest]: it will get less, it will become intellectually lightweight, and I reject that. I think it
[Guest]: is a very respectable school. You may have agreements, disagreements with it, but it's
[Guest]: worthy of respect, it's worthy of interest, it's worthy of study, which is the Hindu nationalist
[Guest]: school of Indian conservatism, which starts with, in some sense, that may be earlier anti-Semites,
[Guest]: but at modern times, it starts with Bankimchandra Chatterjee. And it has its own lineage going
[Guest]: down through Lajpatrai, Malavya, even again, Banarkar is here also, you can see him on
[Guest]: both sides here. And then it comes down all the way to Dindayal Upadhyay, Shyamprasad
[Guest]: Mukherjee. So that has got its own intellectual gravitas. And the argument will always be
[Guest]: made whether this is in fact conservative, or is it a radical revivalist school. And
[Guest]: I think I have taken the position and I continue to take the position that it is either a subset
[Guest]: of Indian conservatism, or it's a sibling of Burkean Indian conservatism. It is not
[Guest]: something far removed. It's very much there. And just kind of ad hominem attacks or just
[Guest]: kind of glib dismissals is not going to make its intellectual respectability go away.
[Amit Varma]: I think I have to confess that I used to glibly dismiss it myself as well. And it's actually
[Amit Varma]: in the course of doing this podcast and many episodes, such as a recent episode with Akshay
[Amit Varma]: Mukul, where we spoke about the Gita Press, when we realized that it's actually a very
[Amit Varma]: coherent intellectual tradition with its own values and first principles, which I may not
[Amit Varma]: agree with. But that doesn't mean that, you know, one should not engage with it and that
[Amit Varma]: it is nothing but bigotry and misogyny dressed up in more respectable colors, which is what
[Amit Varma]: I once used to think. And I have a more nuanced view of that now. And of course, Mota Mota,
[Amit Varma]: the one point that you make in your book is that the Raja Ram Mohan Roy strand of Indian
[Amit Varma]: conservatism sort of became sort of lost its impetus around the death of the Swatantra
[Amit Varma]: Party. And the conservatism that you now see with Hindu nationalism is really a form of
[Amit Varma]: the Bankim Chandra Chottapadhyay.
[Guest]: At least in the political sphere, you're right.
[Amit Varma]: At least in the political sphere.
[Guest]: Yes, that is correct. I think I think Burkean conservatism today would not be able to operate
[Guest]: as an independent political movement. Its best hope is to try and influence other movements.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like to go back to your book now in your chapter on conservatism in the political
[Amit Varma]: sphere in India, you have a sort of a fascinating chronology of this tradition, the Burkean
[Amit Varma]: tradition, the Raja Ram Mohan Roy tradition. And one of the interesting points that you
[Amit Varma]: make there is their willingness to work with and often their support for the British and
[Amit Varma]: often for good reasons that liberals today would appreciate. For example, you know, again
[Amit Varma]: to quote from your book at one point you say, quote, the historian Rajmohan Gandhi has pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that the Dalit leader Anshus had gone one step further when in as early as 1970,
[Amit Varma]: he had argued that the departure of the British in the launch of home rule, whether by Brahmins
[Amit Varma]: or non Brahmins, would crush the Dalits. Stop quote and later on you write, quote, the Raj
[Amit Varma]: did have a liberating touch for India's downtrodden for reasons of their own persons as distinct
[Amit Varma]: as Bhera Malabari, Pandita Ramabai, Cornelia Swarabji, and others were also supporters
[Amit Varma]: of prolonged British rule. They believed that it prevented the emergence of a ruling elite
[Amit Varma]: dominated by the upper caste. And later on in the book, you say, quote, the same issue
[Amit Varma]: received considerable attention from our detractors like Kipling, who argued that Indians did
[Amit Varma]: not deserve freedom, principally, because we were given to oppressing our women and
[Amit Varma]: our poor. And in fact, it was a British who protected these unhappy residents of our fair
[Amit Varma]: land. Stop quote. And, you know, it also strikes me that I've been reading biographies of Churchill
[Amit Varma]: recently, because I've been sort of researching the Bengal famine. And the interesting thing
[Amit Varma]: is that a lot of Churchill's criticisms of Gandhi in the Congress, you know, they make
[Amit Varma]: for pithy quotes, but when you look at his elaborations for them, they have to do with
[Amit Varma]: all these upper caste, we know how they treat the Dalits, or the lower caste, as he would
[Amit Varma]: call them. And, you know, if we leave India, God knows what will happen to them. And this
[Amit Varma]: is very interesting, because, like, on the whole, I think that empire hurt us much more
[Amit Varma]: than it helped us. And one can argue that, but it is not a complete black and white situation.
[Amit Varma]: And the leaders of that generation possibly could not know what we now know with the benefit
[Amit Varma]: of hindsight, that this can be a viable independent nation. They just knew sort of what the reality
[Amit Varma]: is, which is that the British are ruling, how best do we work to make things within
[Amit Varma]: that tradition? That's a classic conservative thinking.
[Guest]: No, I think within the British establishment, while there were some who believed that there
[Guest]: could never be a viable, free India, even early on, Malcolm and Montserrat Elphinstone
[Guest]: and Monroe had kind of figured out that eventually, British rule would end and Indians would take
[Guest]: on. The question really is that, my point is, in the NCERT textbooks, post-independence,
[Guest]: anyone who supported British rule is portrayed as a traitor, as a bad person. And I'm saying
[Guest]: there's such a bloody range of people. Malabaria, Jyotiba Phule, I mean, Anchar Sahej, Ambedkar,
[Guest]: Tej Bahadur Sapoor, they're not all, they're quite patriotic.
[Amit Varma]: Gopi Lalade.
[Guest]: They were not, they were quite patriotic. And the point is that, they were not, and
[Guest]: of course, these leftists will say, Compradors, all the rubbish words they use. They don't
[Guest]: change the fact that the, I mentioned earlier, technically, I don't know how many kings in
[Guest]: India actually use the Manusmriti, but technically, a Dalit's rights in a criminal court were
[Guest]: far fewer than an upper caste person's rights in, under the Manusmriti. And this was not
[Guest]: the case with the Indian penal court, which Macaulay wrote. So, there is a goodness that
[Guest]: the British rule had towards certain subaltern groups. And this granular study needs to be
[Guest]: made. You need to listen to them. It's not just NCERT telling us British rule was bad.
[Guest]: What did Anchar say? What did, you know, what did Ambedkar say? Ambedkar was a member of
[Guest]: the Vice-President's Executive Council right through the war. Does that make him any less
[Guest]: patriotic? I mean, of course not. Hindu Mahasabha President made speeches encouraging Indians
[Guest]: to join the, the war effort, because he said, for so long, we've been disarmed, and we haven't
[Guest]: been given military training. Let us join the Navy, Air Force and Army. Was that unpatriotic?
[Guest]: I think Mahatma Gandhi did during the First World War, right? He did. So, does that make
[Guest]: them unpatriotic? You know, in fact, in these, these things, easy ways of describing dismissing
[Guest]: people take away from the, the complex relationship between the British and the Indians. Most
[Guest]: Indian soldiers who joined the British Indian Army saw soldiering as a noble profession,
[Guest]: as something that they were proud to do, and they went and did it. Now, you can't dismiss
[Guest]: them as mercenary, unpatriotic people. In fact, the present government at least has
[Guest]: made you know, I've written in the book, with Belgium, with Britain, with France, with Israel,
[Guest]: we have now honoured Indian soldiers. Otherwise, the previous dispensations from 47 onwards,
[Guest]: you wanted to keep quiet about the Indian contribution to First World War and Second
[Amit Varma]: World War. And all of those soldiers were fighting for the government of India as it
[Amit Varma]: was then. It's just a different matter that it was a part of the empire. But they might
[Guest]: have been fighting for their regiment, which is very important for them. I mean, this,
[Guest]: this exposed fact to judgment by these self appointed judges, I find that very, very difficult
[Guest]: to accept the Madras regiment, which is the oldest regiment of the Indian Army started
[Guest]: by Stringer Lawrence around the siege of our court in 1750. Now, what are we talking about?
[Guest]: It had Hindus, Muslims, Christians, it had Dalit supper castes, it was one of the first
[Guest]: integrated institutions in India. Now, that is a British gift to us. Now, you can say
[Guest]: they did many other bad things, they had famines, they had racist courts, they didn't let us
[Guest]: sit in first class. I'm not saying everything that they did was right. But you must say
[Guest]: and let's build, let's now create, take that Madras regiment tradition forward, which is
[Amit Varma]: what we are doing today. Right, let's take a quick commercial break now. And when we
[Amit Varma]: come back, let's get a little deeper into the Raja Ram Mohan Roy strand of Indian conservatism.
[Unknown]: Hi, everybody, welcome to another great week on the IBM podcast network. If you're not
[Unknown]: following us on social media, I really don't know what to tell you at this point in time.
[Unknown]: I mean, like I'm so disappointed in you, please go follow us. We're IBM podcast on Twitter,
[Unknown]: Facebook and Instagram. Also got a quick survey running. It's a very short survey. It's a
[Unknown]: survey which helps brands understand what are the effectiveness of podcast advertising
[Unknown]: is we'd really appreciate your help if you could go there and help us out with that.
[Unknown]: It's on IBM podcast.com slash survey really would appreciate your help with that. So this
[Unknown]: week on Cyrus says Cyrus is joined by Ramya Ramamurthy and Varun Deshpande of the Good
[Unknown]: Food Institute. They explain what plant based meat is what will be the next food revolution
[Unknown]: and the objective behind their podcast feeding 10 billion. That's not all you're going to
[Unknown]: see of Ramya this week. Ramya is also on the paperback podcast with Rasita and Satyajit.
[Unknown]: She discusses her book Rebuild and points out how brands have tackled situation of crisis.
[Unknown]: Guys, we have some really exciting news this week to our show advertising is dead has reached
[Unknown]: 50 episodes. This special occasion was marked with a live recording at the glitch office.
[Unknown]: We had some really, really great guests for this episode as well. Rohan Joshi, the comedian
[Unknown]: was there as was actor social media influencer and co host of Agla Station adulthood, Ritasha
[Unknown]: Rathore. The episode drops on Tuesday, November 5. Make sure you check it out on our Kannada
[Unknown]: podcast Thaliharate. Pawan and Surya sit down to talk about how Karnataka must think about
[Unknown]: its future so that the state can deliver prosperity and well being to all its residents. On Simplified,
[Unknown]: the gang is back for part four of the 150th episode. That's a long 150th episode they
[Unknown]: got going there. Join Chuck and Naren as they break down the dying question of why a sign
[Unknown]: called Shiv, the Easter Islands, Instagram influencer ecosystems and a whole lot more.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Jerry Rao about his book The
[Amit Varma]: Indian Conservative and Indian conservatism in general. One of the fascinating elements
[Amit Varma]: of this book was the two parallel strands of Indian conservatism, which, you know, I
[Amit Varma]: am roughly taking the liberty of calling them the Raja Ram Mohan Roy strand and the Bankim
[Amit Varma]: Chandra Chottopadhyay strand. That's a perfectly correct way of looking at it. 3R and BCC.
[Amit Varma]: That's to even shorten it further. So I want to now sort of, you know, you've referred
[Amit Varma]: to RG Bhandarkar a couple of times and you've referred to his 1895 speech. So I'll just
[Guest]: quote from that.
[Amit Varma]: Please, what a brilliant sentence.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems to encapsulate the sort of Burkean conservatism that, you know, a lot
[Amit Varma]: of the Indian liberals slash conservatives of the time, and I'll come to that nomenclature
[Amit Varma]: as well, used to believe in. And Mr. Bhandarkar says, this is 1895, mind you, quote, we should
[Amit Varma]: not adopt the procedure of the French Revolution, but imitate the mode of action of the English
[Amit Varma]: people whose pupils we are. They have realized as great changes as the French Revolution
[Amit Varma]: sought to affect, but in a manner which connects them with the past history of the country,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote, and you speak about this sentence, your words now, quote, this single statement
[Amit Varma]: can be considered the high watermark of 19th and early 20th century conservatism. And you
[Amit Varma]: know, some of my intellectual heroes are people I've thought of as liberal heroes in the classical
[Amit Varma]: liberal sense, people like Naoroji, Ranade, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, especially Agarkar.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that in your book, you have appropriated them all. And where I guess
[Amit Varma]: it fits in is that it seems to me that in their belief for gradualism working within
[Amit Varma]: the system, giving petitions in triplicate, what they are doing is moving towards what
[Amit Varma]: I would call liberal ends through conservative means.
[Guest]: Well, I would say they are advocating gradual, constructive, evolutionary change. That's
[Guest]: the way I would put it. Because as I said, as we talked earlier, this ends always worries
[Guest]: us. And I think the reason I've also mentioned why many of these people did not get tracked
[Guest]: as conservatives. I laid the blame entirely with a section of stupid Tories in England,
[Guest]: who represent the George III Lord North School of Tories and going back to the 1760s, 1770s.
[Guest]: And which also had an element of racism about it. So Naoroji could only get election ticket
[Guest]: from the Liberal Party. You know, when Gokhale went to England, only liberals would meet
[Guest]: to listen to him. So the Tories cut themselves off from the spirit of gradual change when
[Guest]: it came to India. Not all Tories, but most Tories did. And that is what Burke would have
[Guest]: emphasized, did in fact, emphasize in his speeches. And that's what they lost out on.
[Guest]: As a result, willy nilly, all these guys got associated with the British Liberal Party
[Guest]: and therefore they got tagged along as liberals. And yes, the question of what is liberal and
[Guest]: what is conservatives. I mean, considering we are now talking about intellectual traditions
[Guest]: which are 300 years old, it's not some hoary antiquity going back to Plato or Isaiah. This
[Guest]: is recent times. And during the times of Burke and in the times of Locke and Adam Smith and
[Guest]: so on, these were still evolving terms. Okay. And so too in India, I think they were evolving
[Guest]: terms. Now what Bandarkar is saying is very key. He's saying several things in that statement.
[Guest]: He's saying one, the British achieved the same change that the French achieved. Right.
[Guest]: Liberty before law, extended franchise, all those things that were, that the French Revolution
[Guest]: gave as gifts to its citizens. But they achieved it without the violence. And more importantly,
[Guest]: they achieved it without a break in their history, in their consciousness. So, there
[Guest]: remained the continuing thread of Englishness, which was violently disrupted in France and
[Guest]: frankly till the 20th century, till the Dreyfus case and so on. France never really recovered
[Guest]: from these traditions of anti-clericalism at one extreme, Roman Catholic conservatism,
[Guest]: monarchism, all kinds of things. They just never managed to create a blended blend of
[Guest]: brothers the way the English were able to do. That's what he's trying to say that, hey,
[Guest]: let's imitate the British. Let's take our traditions along. The other important point
[Guest]: he's making, which is subtly inserted there, we are their pupils after all. So, there he's
[Guest]: making the point that we have a large connection. We are being ruled by them. That connection
[Guest]: is there. It's an organic connection. It's a link. It's the contingencies of history
[Guest]: have done it. If Iyer Coote had lost at Wandiwash, the French might have ruled us. I mean, these
[Guest]: are contingencies in history. And we never know how the count of actuals would have been.
[Guest]: But given that it has happened, what Bandarkar is saying, we are their pupils and we should
[Guest]: learn from them. We should take advantage of British rule. We should obviously work
[Guest]: against those things about British rule which are bad or inimical to our interests. Nobody
[Guest]: is denying that. Naroji never denied that. He was very clear about that. But do it while
[Guest]: not jettisoning the good things about British rule.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is that even Gandhi himself was of the school of thought. He was
[Amit Varma]: a great admirer of Gokhale in South Africa. He would basically be petitioning by triplicate
[Guest]: till he did his first satyagraha.
[Guest]: He never started a satyagraha without first giving a petition, by the way. Not one. First
[Guest]: he would write a petition request to Irwin, to anybody. It didn't matter who. Only then
[Guest]: would he start his first satyagraha.
[Amit Varma]: And it just strikes me that, you know, just thinking of Gandhi's dandi march, Naroji in
[Amit Varma]: 1894 or 1895, if I remember correctly, had brought up the salt tax in the British Parliament,
[Amit Varma]: demanding that it be repealed. And Gandhi took up the same cause later. And the irony
[Amit Varma]: is both of them failed because the salt tax today is far higher, no matter how you look
[Amit Varma]: at it, than it was back in the day.
[Guest]: Is salt subject to GST? I don't think so. Is it?
[Amit Varma]: I don't know. But the last I checked, like three years ago, I wrote a piece about it.
[Amit Varma]: And the last I checked, the salt tax in independent India was much more than under the British,
[Guest]: which, in a sense, buttresses my point of the kind of tragedy, the kind of oppression
[Guest]: you should get this in the front pages, because this is something we, we must be the problem
[Guest]: with salt in the British was more than the tax. It was also an egregiously absurd monopoly.
[Guest]: And in fact, there are studies which show that it might have actually resulted in lower
[Guest]: consumption of salt among the poor, stunting of bodies and all kinds of, you know, really
[Guest]: reprehensible consequences. There was a department called Akbari department. Akbari department
[Guest]: was, and people got jobs in Akbari department, they, they sold salt and controlled salt.
[Guest]: There's a Premchand short story called Namakka Daroga. So there is a Daroga, there is a policeman
[Guest]: or a police inspector whose job is to control salt, Namakka Daroga. So it was a very central
[Guest]: part of the Raj experience and a very unfortunate one.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a nice segue to sort of the next point I want to look at, which is conservative
[Amit Varma]: support for markets. Because the interesting thing is the British also, for example, destroyed
[Amit Varma]: the cotton industry in India, and it, you know, all sort of shifted to Manchester and
[Amit Varma]: they destroyed many local industries. And but what a mistake that people often make
[Amit Varma]: today is conflating empire and markets, just because empire came to us via a corporation,
[Amit Varma]: which is the East India Company. But as many of what I would call the great freedom fighting
[Amit Varma]: liberals, but you would say conservatives, and I think there's, you know, sense in ascribing
[Amit Varma]: both those labels to them. What a lot of them constantly protested about was what the British
[Amit Varma]: really did was they came here and they destroyed free markets in India, rather than the other
[Amit Varma]: way around. And I'm again going to quote from your book, quote, both Naoroji and Dutt, that's
[Amit Varma]: Dadabhai Naoroji and R C Dutt, both Naoroji and Dutt held firm that the Indian entrepreneur,
[Amit Varma]: the Indian merchant, the Indian producer did not need or want any special support. What
[Amit Varma]: they advocated was a free and level playing field, where British economic interests and
[Amit Varma]: the interests of favored British crony capitalists would not be the deciding factor in the framing
[Amit Varma]: of government policies and actions, stop quote. And they were, of course, protesting behavior,
[Amit Varma]: which impoverished millions in our country, which destroyed our local economy, and which
[Amit Varma]: even other great conservatives like Burke and Adam Smith protested against. Adam Smith
[Guest]: hated the East India Company for two reasons. One, he felt that it is ridiculous to allow
[Guest]: a commercial company to rule a country. It will always rule in the interest of its shareholders,
[Guest]: not of the country, which is the primary purpose of government, to rule for the benefit of
[Guest]: the citizens. And two, because it was a monopoly. On both counts, he hated it. Burke, of course,
[Guest]: liked it immensely, for very similar reasons. I think the Valsal Neerajan actually made
[Guest]: this point in practical terms when he fought with the British shipping companies, P&O,
[Guest]: whatever the shipping company was, Inchcape, Lord Inchcape was a guy running it. You know,
[Guest]: they basically had monopolies.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And he said, wait a minute, I don't want to run a ship. What's the big deal? You know,
[Guest]: in fact, there is a very famous Tamilian, V.O. Chidambaram Pillai. He started a South
[Guest]: Indian shipping, steam shipping company, and he was basically put in jail. He was not allowed
[Guest]: to, I mean, we were not, free entry, which is one of the requirements of a market economy,
[Guest]: was he essentially denied.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I did an episode on the historian Manu Pillai about this and he mentioned Mr.
[Amit Varma]: Pillai, and who started this thing in about, I think 1906, 1907, lost everything, was impoverished.
[Amit Varma]: And then when Gandhi returned to India from South Africa, he was this one time tycoon
[Amit Varma]: was in the egregious position of trying to borrow a little bit of a petty amount from
[Amit Varma]: Mohandas Gandhi and just makes you feel so sad that these sort of forgotten heroes and
[Amit Varma]: the way they were destroyed by an oppressive empire, not entirely dissimilar from the oppressive
[Amit Varma]: empire of today.
[Guest]: Yeah, this is the point, you know, when state sovereign governments decide to use their
[Guest]: power to stifle markets, to stifle free human economic activity, they invariably do it to
[Guest]: help one bunch of people who support them. And the rest is history, rest is sadness.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's sad that the intellectual argument for markets becomes hard to make an almost
[Amit Varma]: counterintuitive because what people from the outside is they see companies benefit
[Amit Varma]: and they conflate that with markets. So earlier, you would look at East India Company benefiting
[Amit Varma]: and you would conflate that with, oh, look what free markets have done to India when
[Amit Varma]: in reality, there was only cronyism, no free markets. And you have a similar thing today
[Amit Varma]: when you have that, oh, look at the favours the government is dispensing to its favoured
[Amit Varma]: capitalists be they Ambani, Adani, whoever. And again, this is cronyism. It's not free
[Guest]: markets. We don't have free markets here either. Free entry is one of the most important things.
[Guest]: Anybody should be able to enter a business, you know, there's licensing, there's prohibiting
[Guest]: people from entering business, giving entire Russian trade goes to one British company,
[Guest]: entire Indian trade one company. Absurd, completely absurd.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll take you now to something again, which you said in your book, you just brought up
[Amit Varma]: George the third, and you pointed out in your book, and this is very interesting that in
[Amit Varma]: some ways, there is a similarity between George the third and Churchill, in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: in the 1930s, one of the aims of all these Indian conservatives was actually about to
[Amit Varma]: happen. India was about to be granted dominion status as Stanley Baldwin wanted and Baldwin
[Amit Varma]: was firm about it. But Churchill staked his career on it. In fact, that decade of his
[Amit Varma]: is called the wilderness years because he chose to go against his party on two questions.
[Amit Varma]: One of course, is granting India dominions status and the other of course, was which
[Amit Varma]: evolved in the second half of the decade was the appeasement of Hitler. But the interesting
[Amit Varma]: point you were making there was that the conservatives almost got what they wanted, if not for Churchill,
[Amit Varma]: and then we might still have been a dominion with the titular head being the British Queen
[Amit Varma]: and as per you and as per conservatives, that's not a very bad state of affairs. So my question
[Amit Varma]: to you, therefore, is a slightly mischievous question is that is independence, then a mistake
[Amit Varma]: that we should regret, and it was accompanied by say, the horrors of partition, which you
[Guest]: would expect with any radical act. So what would these are things that after the fact
[Guest]: one can never really make judgments about counterfactuals, but let me first deal with
[Guest]: the George the third thing. That's not my original idea. Leopold Emery, who was a minister
[Guest]: in Churchill's cabinet, he has said, he was Secretary of State for India. He said Winston
[Guest]: knows as much about India as George the third knew about the colony. So that's where the
[Guest]: idea his own friend, colleague, schoolmate, he said that there's a history between Emery
[Amit Varma]: and Churchill. Have you read Churchill's autobiography? My early days? No, I haven't. So in that there's
[Amit Varma]: this funny incident where he goes to school, and he sees a small kid near the swimming
[Amit Varma]: pool. And he goes and he pushes this kid in the swimming pool. And then that kid emerges
[Amit Varma]: enraged and he chases Churchill around to beat him up. And it turns out that kid is
[Amit Varma]: actually two years senior to him, and is Leopold Emery. And then Churchill calms him down by
[Amit Varma]: saying that I'm sorry, I didn't know you were senior because you're so small. And then he
[Amit Varma]: realizes that could be a faux pas. And he says, Okay, my father was also small, he was
[Guest]: a great man. Anyway, that's a, that's a complete aside. They were good friends. But, but Emery
[Guest]: was sensible. He said, Hey, this guy doesn't get it. Okay, now let's look at the counterfactuals
[Guest]: that you've talked about. So Aminata Nair wrote a brilliant piece some years ago, about
[Guest]: India becoming free in 47 and Hong Kong in 97. I mean, our British rule ending in Hong
[Guest]: Kong. And he said, maybe Hong Kong lucked out by having 50 years of free markets and
[Guest]: the stable British laws and, and free trade. So it's not obvious that independence is necessarily
[Guest]: such a great thing. And in fact, Bernard Lewis has made this point when he talks about the
[Guest]: Arab Middle East. He says independence is not the same as freedom. You can be a French
[Guest]: colony Syria, then you become independent. Syrian people are no freer, they still have
[Guest]: a dictator ruling them. So those are things that now there's also been a view has been
[Guest]: a view when in the 30s, as this, especially after 1940, the Lahore resolution of the Muslim
[Guest]: League, when this discussion kept going, there were two, three possibilities. One was to
[Guest]: take someone like the Prince of Wales, and make him the titular head of a united India.
[Guest]: So then this Hindu Muslim, the Muslim separatism for Pakistan automatically comes down. There
[Guest]: was another move to go and find the last surviving descendant of Bahadur Shah Zafar and make
[Guest]: him a titular emperor. So there were these kinds of ideas that were floated, it was not
[Guest]: inconceivable that you could think of a dispensation which has a monarchical, because generally
[Guest]: imperial dispensations tend to be monarchical.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, at one point, Mahatma Gandhi made a throwaway comment that the Nizam of Hyderabad
[Amit Varma]: could be the next emperor of India, to which Savarkar responded by saying that no, it should
[Amit Varma]: be a Hindu kingdom with the king of Nepal on top, which is very amusing in hindsight.
[Guest]: No, I think what if the Nizam had been made emperor, but it had been a constitutional
[Guest]: monarchy, hey, it might have worked because it might have kept Pakistan. But you know,
[Guest]: these are all counterfactuals. If you look in my book, I am now convinced that these
[Guest]: are silly arguments that we should stop pursuing. Pakistan is a reality, it has happened. This
[Guest]: idea of let's unite again, all together, all that is bogus, we should just move on.
[Amit Varma]: But my question was not so much about the counterfactual, but about if you put yourself
[Amit Varma]: back in that time, independence is clearly a radical idea, remaining part of the empire
[Guest]: would be the conservative way to go.
[Guest]: Everybody wanted that, Sapporo wanted that, Shastri wanted that. And finally, if you look
[Guest]: at it for three years, we remained a dominion. In fact, that was V.P. Menon and Mountbatten's
[Guest]: and Patel and Nehru's final decision to, and actually supported it. So, suppose we continued,
[Guest]: kept a constitution, but remained a dominion, it's entirely possible we might be more like
[Guest]: Canada or Australia today. I don't know. It's very difficult to, I think it might have been
[Guest]: politically difficult. I think the movement under Mahatma, which was not a conservative
[Guest]: movement, which was a radical movement, had radicalized the Indian masses a little too
[Guest]: much. And I don't think people would have gone along with, they might have in 1935,
[Amit Varma]: but not in 1947.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Speaking of sort of political difficulties, let's continue talking about the Raja Ram
[Amit Varma]: Mohan Roy school, where, you know, we've gone through this early set of reformist conservatives
[Amit Varma]: in your Navroji, Gokhale, Mehta, I presume you would ignore, and even Motilal Nehru to
[Amit Varma]: an extent would probably fall within that.
[Guest]: He was not a man of many ideas. So, there's no intellectual, there's not much intellectual
[Guest]: stuff you can find as coming output out.
[Amit Varma]: I think a lot of, from what little I know Motilal Nehru, it seems to me that he was
[Amit Varma]: actually a classical liberal, who did believe in gradualism and working sort of.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's for sure. Let's move on to the, what you call the conservative caucus
[Amit Varma]: within the Congress, where you point out that at the time India gained independent, we had
[Amit Varma]: the three golden years where, I'll again quote from your book, quote, for the first three
[Amit Varma]: years of independence till the new constitution came into force, the Ram Mohan Roy tradition
[Amit Varma]: of conservatism held sway in the country. The erudite conservative Rajendra Prasad presided
[Amit Varma]: over the Constituent Assembly. The incandescent conservative Raj Gopalachari succeeded Mount
[Amit Varma]: Batten as a governor general. Ambedkar, a former member of the Vice Troy's council became
[Amit Varma]: the chairman of the drafting committee for the constitution. Sardar Patel did defang
[Amit Varma]: the princely order, not a very conservative thing to do, but he understood the value of
[Amit Varma]: continuity if only symbolic. Stop quote. And I'll come back to, you know, you're claiming
[Amit Varma]: Ambedkar as a conservative also after this.
[Guest]: Ambedkar and Gandhi are, it's very difficult for anybody to claim them.
[Guest]: They do contain multitudes.
[Guest]: But the interesting thing is that many leftists call Gandhi a conservative. So, I find that
[Guest]: tongue in cheek kind of funny and interesting. And Ambedkar, many people criticize him for
[Guest]: having been in the Vice Troy's executive council as if that was a bad thing.
[Unknown]: No, and your point was
[Guest]: You know, he and the guy, what's his name, Bengali fellow, yeah, who was also in the
[Guest]: Vice Troy's executive council, worked on Damodar Valley Corporation. They worked on
[Guest]: constructive things. They were not stupid. You know, they're not unpatriotic at all.
[Guest]: This binary, anybody who was pro-British Raj in any, even in a slight way, is not a patriot.
[Guest]: Anybody who's gone to jail against a British Raj is a patriot is not acceptable.
[Amit Varma]: I guess patriotism exists when the nation exists. But the point that you also made about
[Amit Varma]: Ambedkar was that it was, in your view, a masterful move to make him in charge of drafting
[Amit Varma]: the constitution because he brought conservatizing influence, if I can use that neologism, upon
[Amit Varma]: the framing of the constitution. Explain that to me a little bit.
[Guest]: See, the Government of India Act of 1935 has to be one of the finest pieces of legislation
[Guest]: ever written up. It was drafted after extensive parliamentary discussions, committee discussions
[Guest]: in Westminster. ATI was very actively involved in it. And it basically provided for pretty
[Guest]: much the federal structure that we have today in India. It also provided for a relatively
[Guest]: strong center, which is, again, what we have in India today. And offshoots after the Government
[Guest]: of India Act came the Reserve Bank of India Act, this, that and the other. They were all
[Guest]: came together as one bundle. They created the institutional framework for India going
[Guest]: forward. We could have simply dropped that completely and gone after a French constitution
[Guest]: or Austrian constitution or something, or even an American constitution. We chose not
[Guest]: to. We chose to take the Government of India Act of 1935 and then add it, subtract it.
[Guest]: And that's Ambedkar's principal contribution to the way the process worked, not the content,
[Guest]: the process. For instance, first past the post. First past the post is very much there
[Guest]: in Government of India Act, although remember at that time they had separate electorates.
[Guest]: But within the electorates, it was first past the post within constituencies. Very English,
[Guest]: very American. It's not there in continental constitutions, not there in the Israeli constitution.
[Guest]: They're all about proportional representation. But this is what constituency based first
[Guest]: past the post, which isn't what has given us stability and not the instability that
[Guest]: France, Italy, and Israel constantly experience. These ideas were taken and taken forward how
[Guest]: a comptroller and auditor general function. Very much there in 1935 Act. I mean, you know,
[Guest]: the way the federal court was constituted or the Morris Quire. So, all of those paraphernalia
[Guest]: were very well kept so that, in fact, on January 26, 1950, there was no discontinuity. And
[Guest]: one of the interesting things that the Constitution of India did was all prevailing earlier laws
[Guest]: will continue. Slowly we've changed them. You know, it took us a long time to change
[Guest]: the one on homosexuality, but invariably we've been changing them over time. But it was not
[Guest]: an abrupt thing. To my mind, that is the greatest achievement. Not jettisoning common law traditions,
[Guest]: not jettisoning principles of equity traditions, not jettisoning the Government of India Act
[Guest]: of 1935 completely, but building on it has ensured that our constitution sticks. I've
[Guest]: lived in Latin America and in those countries every 10 years they change the constitution.
[Guest]: There's complete instability and chaos as a result. You know, this has endured for more
[Amit Varma]: than 70 years now. And, you know, I mean, it's been amended so often that people often
[Amit Varma]: joke is a periodical and not a book. And, you know, you've kind of made the controversial
[Amit Varma]: point in your book that it's a conservative constitution, whereas a lot of other people
[Amit Varma]: would view it as a fairly radical constitution. You know, Gautam Bhatia had a recent book
[Amit Varma]: out with the title Transformative Constitution, which sort of sums it up. And I did an episode
[Amit Varma]: with the political scientist Rahul Verma, who's written a book with Pradeep Chabbar
[Amit Varma]: called Identity and Ideology. And his point there was that this was a radical constitution
[Amit Varma]: and that conservatives were up in arms. I mean, he didn't call them conservatisms, but
[Amit Varma]: the fault line here, the ideological fault line was one of statism, where conservatives
[Amit Varma]: and I don't think he used that term because he avoided those terms in that book, but I'm
[Amit Varma]: using it, but that conservatives felt that society is fine as it is, and the state should
[Amit Varma]: not try to do social engineering and reshape it. And the liberals or the radicals who shaped
[Amit Varma]: the constitution felt that no, society does need to be reshaped.
[Guest]: Yeah, the issue really, if you think about it, despite all their pretensions to whatever
[Guest]: the British never abolished untouchability, for instance, technically untouchability existed
[Guest]: in British India. Having said that, the most egregious forms of untouchability actually
[Guest]: existed in the native states, in Travancore, for instance, not in British India. And in
[Guest]: British India, Ambedkar or Rabadu Srinivasan or anyone got education, got, they were able
[Guest]: to make their impact. And they had votes. Voting was given by property and education,
[Guest]: not by caste. So the Government of India Act of 1935 gave as many Dalits who were educated
[Guest]: and who had property and paid taxes, they gave them the vote, it was not based on caste.
[Guest]: So it is true that abolition of untouchability was a radical act or seen as a radical act
[Guest]: by many people. But I see it as part of the evolutionary process. I see it as going back
[Guest]: to Macaulay, going back to Nankumar being hanged under war in his things. He was a Brahmin
[Guest]: and he was hanged. And there was a big furor in Calcutta, not so much whether he was guilty
[Guest]: or not guilty, but whether it was okay to hang a Brahmin. So each step it has moved
[Guest]: on. And so I see many of the so-called radical changes done in 1950 as being built on the
[Guest]: changes of 1909, of 1919, of 1935. And the continuous evolution, going back all the way
[Guest]: to the Regulating Act and British India Act in the late 18th century, from then till now.
[Guest]: Queen's Proclamation of 1858, it talks about no discrimination based on caste, creed or
[Guest]: religion. British didn't always follow it. I'm not saying they followed it, but principle
[Guest]: is enunciated and there is this gradual evolution. So I disagree with both the people you've
[Guest]: interviewed from the perspective of historical process. I'm not talking about every detail
[Guest]: of content. There are changes in content in the Constitution, which are quite radical.
[Guest]: But the processes, the radical step is a next step from a step taken 10 years earlier. That's
[Guest]: the way I see it. We had limited franchise. Now we had adult franchise. But at no stage,
[Guest]: by the way, was franchise based on gender or caste. Never. It was based on property,
[Guest]: on tax payment and education. So that was eliminated and just age was made. Anybody
[Guest]: over 21 can vote. And so I see that as a step rather than as a radical break. So it's the
[Guest]: way you want to look at the history of the evolution of the Constitution and just look
[Guest]: at our neighbor, two of our neighbors. Pakistan never kind of built on the Government of India
[Guest]: Act of 1935. Instead, Ayub Khan came up with something called basic democracy, which was
[Guest]: a completely new idea. I'm not saying it's a good idea, a bad idea, but it was a radical
[Guest]: and that never worked. It worked for five years and then that went and another constitution
[Guest]: came. Sri Lanka, they're troubling themselves going back and forth between this and that
[Guest]: Prime Minister presidential and never resolving this. And in fact, creating it doesn't mean
[Guest]: we don't amend. Of course, we amend, but we still keep that continuity as we amend. And
[Guest]: that is the principal desiderata of conservatism.
[Amit Varma]: Let's let's kind of go back to the chronology and sort of the Ram Mohan Roy conservatives,
[Amit Varma]: as you say, and for three years during the transitional period, 47 to 50, they are in
[Amit Varma]: powerful positions, they are shaping the new India. And then in a sense for that, for that
[Amit Varma]: strand of conservatism, it all falls apart. Patel dies, Prasad gets a titular post of
[Amit Varma]: President, Purushottam Das Tandon is knocked out of the party, Govind Ballapant is CM of
[Amit Varma]: UP, but he's kind of sidelined as well. And, and it's all Nehru, VP Menon, they're sort
[Amit Varma]: of Fabian socialist vision, which is dominating.
[Amit Varma]: VK Menon, not VP.
[Amit Varma]: Sorry, yeah.
[Guest]: VP Menon's a good guy.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. Sorry, my bad. VP Menon helped bring all the states together, of course,
[Amit Varma]: and has written a fine book on it. And, you know, and like you point out, there were some
[Amit Varma]: minor successes, such as they did manage to stop Nehru from carrying out collective farming.
[Guest]: 20 million people died in China. We don't know how many people died under Stalin in
[Guest]: in Russia, because they didn't keep track of killings. Collective farming could have
[Guest]: set back Indian agriculture, could have, could have created massive chaos. And there was
[Guest]: a very strong lobby for it. So, Tantra Party fought it relentlessly. Charan Singh, who
[Guest]: was in and out of the Congress Party, actually, at that time, I think he was in the Congress
[Guest]: Party, fought it relentlessly. And somehow, the caucus prevailed. And Nehru's other advisors
[Guest]: who wanted to push us towards collective farming were kept back. Also, remember, at that time,
[Guest]: property was a fundamental right. This obscene amendment hadn't yet come.
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode on the right to property. And I agree with you, that is the most obscene
[Guest]: amendment.
[Guest]: This obscene amendment hadn't yet come. And Nehru never, Nehru disliked property being
[Guest]: a fundamental right. He disliked the idea of justiciable compensation. But he was gradualist
[Guest]: enough not to tamper with it. It happened after his death. So, yes, we started, I think
[Guest]: the high point of losing influence was 56, 55, Avadi Congress, after which it became
[Guest]: very much of a left-wing, pro-Soviet, pro-central planning, pro-gigantism party on the economic
[Guest]: side. And on the political side, I think it remained one of kind of tops-down fixes. Community
[Guest]: development program, he will spend 500 crores, you know, some tops-down stuff without sufficient
[Guest]: citizen participation or grassroots involvements. And making some compromises like linguistic
[Guest]: states, which they couldn't fight off completely. And it was a very sad time for the country,
[Guest]: very sad time. And it continued for a long time, unfortunately.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it was in an economic sense, I admire Nehru for many things. And I think he was
[Amit Varma]: a great statesman, but in economics, he was a complete disaster. And this would definitely
[Amit Varma]: have been part of the reason that there weren't enough countervailing influences and he sidelined
[Guest]: Raj Gopalachari and forced him to leave.
[Guest]: I actually hold as economic advisors more responsible than even Nehru, Malo Nubesvi,
[Guest]: K. R. V. Rao, K. N. Raj, all these, Sukumoy Chakravarti, all these fellows who kept writing
[Guest]: theoretical papers sitting in Delhi school, and who really sidelined the chinoys of the
[Guest]: world and pushed through some very absurd, I mean, Malo Nubesvi actually believed that
[Guest]: the economy was some kind of a machine. He had no time for price signals, for, you know,
[Guest]: consumer preferences. Everything was a machine and it would work. If you made so much steel,
[Guest]: you could make so many cars. If you made so many cars, you could consume so much petrol.
[Amit Varma]: And it's ironic because Hayek's great essay, The Use of Knowledge in Society, was written
[Guest]: in I think, 45 or 46 before.
[Guest]: All this was known, Baba. There's no, the idea that they didn't know that this was zeitgeist.
[Guest]: I know people like Ram Goha pushed this idea. No, no, they were just, you know, following
[Guest]: the fashions of that time.
[Amit Varma]: Which I think broadly is true. I mean, no one knew what the Soviet Union actually was
[Guest]: at that time. People sort of idealized it.
[Guest]: They had put the Sputnik in space. So people thought they were ahead of the US and the
[Guest]: West. So there was that kind of, but there was also, I think, brazen stupidity for which
[Guest]: we are all paying a price. I mean, the point is, it's not a price that they only paid or
[Guest]: their families paid. It's a price that the whole country has paid.
[Amit Varma]: I want to move on to the Bankimchandra Chatterjee School because it's sort of more relevant
[Amit Varma]: to our times. But before I do that, let's talk about the last political gasp of the
[Amit Varma]: Ram Mohan Roy School. And of course, you have the Conservative Caucus sort of dying out
[Amit Varma]: within the Congress when, you know, Shastri dies, Gulzarilal Nanda leaves, Maraji Desai
[Amit Varma]: leaves. And by the end of that decade, by the end of the 60s, Svatantra Party is also
[Amit Varma]: a spent force. And your point is that politically, the Svatantra Party and by extension, the
[Amit Varma]: Ram Mohan Roy School of Conservatism is doomed to fail politically. Why do you say that?
[Guest]: As a separate political movement, institution or party, I don't think it can succeed. In
[Guest]: democratic politics, the issue that seems to matter most to voters is identity. And
[Guest]: if at all there is an interest in economics, the interest seems to be in redistributive,
[Guest]: goody giving, patronage economics. So, this is the nature of the voter. And this has been
[Guest]: discussed even by Pericles. I mean, this is not a new thing. The nature of the voter is
[Guest]: something we have to live with, which is one reason, by the way, why many aristocracies
[Guest]: resisted increasing the franchise. I'm not supporting it, but I'm saying there was always
[Guest]: this fear that now, if you're going to vote by identity, like the Republican Party in
[Guest]: America is about guns, it is about abortion, it's about immigration. It's not about taxes
[Guest]: and trade. Those are secondary issues. The Conservative Party in England is about England
[Guest]: and identity and so on. And the Labour is about free immigration and more refugees and
[Guest]: so on. These are about identity issues. It's not about... And then the ideology, the economic
[Guest]: ideology comes. Now, what is the identity issue that Swatantra or Ram Mohan Liberal
[Guest]: can put up? Very difficult. It's too elitist. You don't appeal to any one caste or any religion
[Guest]: or any linguistic group. You can't call yourself Telugu Desam. You can't call yourself, you
[Guest]: know, Muslim League or Kalidhal. So, therefore, to get elected is not possible. That's my
[Guest]: point I'm trying to make. A party like this as a political party. Now, can it be a movement?
[Guest]: Can it be a debating society? After all, Fabian Society, that left-wing group that did so
[Guest]: much damage to the 20th century, it was just a debating group. So, you can influence without
[Guest]: necessarily being a political party. That's the point I'm trying to make. And to try and
[Guest]: start a political party is a waste of time.
[Amit Varma]: No, the Ram Mohan School of Conservatism sort of failed there, at least in a political sense.
[Amit Varma]: But the strand of conservatism which did succeed was the Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay strand
[Guest]: of conservatism, which no one expected. And they're in charge now.
[Guest]: Particularly in the 50s, I don't think Jansang had more than 3, 4, 5 MPs, whatever. The communists
[Guest]: always had many more. No one expected the Bankim Chandra School to do so well politically.
[Guest]: And that's in the 62 and 67 elections. Swatantra had more seats than Jansang. So, but the reason
[Guest]: I think that's been able to chug along and increase its footprint, frankly, goes back
[Guest]: to Lajpat Rai. It goes back to, and even to Bandarkar. Bandarkar's speech talks about
[Guest]: the fact that, hey, you know, Hindus better become anti-caste. We better get consolidation
[Guest]: across castes. And this is also very prominent in Savarkar's writings.
[Amit Varma]: So,
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Savarkar and Ambedkar were together against Gandhi on the issue of caste. A lot
[Amit Varma]: of people don't realize this when they sort of
[Guest]: Yeah, so there's, and that in the initial years, when I was in college, for instance,
[Guest]: in the 60s, Jansang was a North Indian Hindu, Hindi party. And that too upper caste, you
[Guest]: know, light complexioned people, kind of party. It has changed. Its current leader is an OBC.
[Guest]: I mean, hey, it's, it's been able to do what, in fact, Kanshi Ram always used to say a communist
[Guest]: party of India is a joke. All its politburo are Brahmins and upper caste. All the workers
[Guest]: are Dalits. And that has been the problem with virtually all political parties in India.
[Guest]: They have been able to break that genuine Hindu consolidation that Lajpat Rai politically
[Guest]: wanted and which Bhandarkar intellectually argued for and Savarkar supported in his early
[Guest]: days. That has happened. It's happened for a variety of reasons, including I mentioned
[Guest]: somewhere in the book, the Ramayan television series of what is this fellow, this
[Guest]: Ramanand Sagar
[Guest]: In cultural history terms, he'll go down as important as Kambanur Tulsi, Das or Tyagaraja.
[Guest]: Just wait and see when it's written a hundred years from now, the importance of what he
[Guest]: did. But for a variety of reasons, they have been able to, but I think this is the single
[Guest]: most important reason. The identity of a Samajwadi party is as of a Yadav party. The identity
[Guest]: of NCPs as of a Maratha party, for Kalidhar as a Jat Seekh party. This has managed to
[Guest]: take the identity across castes and has been able to get OBCs into it. This was very much
[Guest]: Lajpat Rai's vision and that has happened. It's almost as if they've kind of systematically,
[Guest]: they've also looked at the ideas going back to Bankim. What is the original idea of Anandamath?
[Guest]: A dedicated group of Sanyasis, Bhairagis, who are worshippers of the mother goddess,
[Guest]: who are committed to sacrifice and freedom. Actually, today's BJP vocabulary is uncannily
[Guest]: similar. Vande Mataram, Mother India, spirit of sacrifice, spirit of asceticism, anti-corruption.
[Guest]: On the ideas side, they have gone back to Bankim quite well. On the organizational and
[Guest]: people side, they have been the most successful party in terms of they have a Dalit president.
[Guest]: Before that, they even made Muslim president. So, they've kind of been able to do these
[Guest]: things quite well. And really, I'm quite impressed. The adherence to Bankim and the ongoing Vivekananda.
[Guest]: Vivekananda is very important in Modi's vocabulary. And again, the same ideas of sacrifice of
[Guest]: motherland, those ideas taken forward and mingled with the political organization of
[Guest]: how in a democratic polity does one get the OBC vote? How does one get the Dalit vote?
[Guest]: How does one get the tribal vote? And long years of hard work, particularly the tribal
[Guest]: votes is not recent. I mean, that work has been going on for 30-40 years in parts of
[Guest]: tribal India, and it's finally paid off. So, there's still a problem with the South. It's
[Guest]: not clear that it's been able to. Karnataka is a bit of a, you know, one swallow not making
[Guest]: a summer. So, we'll see if they'll be able to push through in Telangana, Andhra, Kerala,
[Guest]: Tamil Nadu. But the overall effect has been very, very interesting. Also, the base of
[Guest]: the leadership, the original Hindu Mahasabha leadership was really very much Bengali and
[Guest]: Punjabi and UP maybe. And the original RSS leadership was, you know, Maharashtra Vidarbha.
[Guest]: Now you have Gujarat, you have, you know, different parts of the country pushing forth
[Amit Varma]: the leaders. You have an OBC Prime Minister. I'll sort of synthesize all this by quoting
[Amit Varma]: from your book again, which very eloquently expresses sort of the origin of the school
[Amit Varma]: of where you say, quote, a frequently asked question is whether Hindu nationalism by its
[Amit Varma]: very Hindu and very nationalistic nature can be a branch of conservatism at all. This needs
[Amit Varma]: to be viewed contextually. Abraham Lincoln, who was perhaps the greatest American president,
[Amit Varma]: referred to the mystic chords of memory that bind people together. When you combine this
[Amit Varma]: with the fact that the British conquered India and pretty openly took the position that they
[Amit Varma]: had conquered it from predominantly Muslim rulers, it became clear that non-Muslims in
[Amit Varma]: India, taking into account that the very term Hindu was an evolving one, had no option but
[Amit Varma]: to seek a renaissance if they were to sustain themselves as a community with shared mutual
[Amit Varma]: loyalty rather than as atomized splinters. Bankim and Lajpat Rai, along with several
[Amit Varma]: others realized that a shared Hindu cultural identity could be the basis of overcoming
[Amit Varma]: vertical and horizontal boundaries among Hindus like caste, stop quote. And you later said
[Amit Varma]: they could then be a band of brothers. And partly, like you said, this has finally taken
[Amit Varma]: shape in the sense that more Dalits voted for the BJP than the Congress in both the
[Guest]: 2014 and the 2019 elections. In UP, there might be as many Dalits voting for BJP as
[Amit Varma]: for BSP. Absolutely. So, you know, it's quite an achievement. Whatever, whatever activists
[Amit Varma]: on the outside might say, it seems the Dalits of India have voted with their feet for the
[Amit Varma]: moment. Now, I want to come back to a slightly more sort of troubling element. There's a
[Amit Varma]: later quote in your book, the question that arises a quote, the question that arises is
[Amit Varma]: whether the pre-independence Hindu nationalist movement was a conservative one or not. It
[Amit Varma]: certainly had a conservative flavor to it. But it also had a revivalist and rejectionist
[Amit Varma]: flavor, stop quote. And in a different part of the book, you talk about how the danger
[Amit Varma]: in these kinds of nationalistic movements can be in othering certain people the same
[Amit Varma]: way the Nazis did, for example, and you bring up that comparison, and you say that that
[Amit Varma]: othering could become something pathological, and could descend into something which is
[Amit Varma]: very far from conservatism. Can you sort of elaborate?
[Guest]: Yeah, you see, when you talk about revivalist, if you say that only Gupta era or Chola era
[Guest]: stuff matters, the last 200 years of British era is all hell, is all poison, all to be
[Guest]: forgotten, all to be jettisoned, that is revivalism. You know, that is not conservatism. The second
[Guest]: thing in terms of othering is really, Band of Brothers is, we are together, we have a
[Guest]: shared culture, we have a shared community, a shared territory, whatever. Does it require
[Guest]: that we move to the next step of disliking another Band of Brothers? And so that's called
[Guest]: othering, really, essentially, to build a kind of political platform on a negative kind
[Guest]: of trajectory. And it's not unusual, it happens. You could be a proud German, and you could
[Guest]: have included the Jews as part of proud Germans. After all, between 1900 and 1930, although
[Guest]: they were 1% of the population, 30% of the Nobel prizes won by Germans were won by Jewish
[Guest]: Germans. They never thought of themselves. But if you choose to other them, then you
[Guest]: end up with a pathological situation, which in the long run can be detrimental, can come
[Guest]: back like a Basmasurah, it can come back to actually kill you. And this is a problem that
[Guest]: a lot of nationalist conservative movements have. Parnell was, you know, look at Parnell,
[Guest]: how he was othered. He was a great Irish Catholic leader. But the church went against him because
[Guest]: he had an affair or something. Purely personal reason, you othered the man. And then the
[Guest]: Irish lost 50 years, that they could have gotten their home rule earlier, under Parnell.
[Guest]: So these things, you have to be very careful, you have to be extremely careful that you
[Guest]: don't. And that's why revivalism and being anti-British, and anti-McCauley-Putra, and
[Guest]: anti-British rule, and anti-English, ends up also becoming anti-Western civilization,
[Guest]: which is the source of so much modern good stuff for us. So it's dangerous. You should
[Guest]: not other, you know, anyone because in doing that, you lose. I mean, TSA Ledder is not
[Guest]: a fool to read the Upanishad. He's, you know, he's reaching out to all that is great in
[Guest]: human traditions. We should be like that and not other, either the West or Muslims or anyone.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a passage in your book, which seemed to me that I would have agreed with
[Amit Varma]: if you had written it in, say, 2002, when Vajpayee was Prime Minister. But I cannot
[Amit Varma]: agree with it today, which is, quote, almost imperceptibly, the face of Hindu nationalism
[Amit Varma]: changed. Gone was the opposition to English and the attempts to force Hindi and reluctant
[Amit Varma]: states. Traces of obscurantism associated with the revivalist ideology were quietly
[Amit Varma]: jettisoned. The Ram Rajya Parishad's opposition to changes to the Hindu marriage and divorce
[Amit Varma]: code would appear quaint today. Hindu nationalism has acquired a chic contemporary age. Stop
[Amit Varma]: quote. And even if this might have been true in 2002, when Vajpayee was PM, it seems to
[Amit Varma]: me that it's actually shifted the other way today in the sense that cow is back as an
[Amit Varma]: issue. Now that they're done with 370, they're at some point going to move on to the uniform
[Amit Varma]: civil code, which in a sense is, you know, the Hindu code bill issue all over again,
[Amit Varma]: expressed differently as resentment against the other, you know, apply to everyone. Similarly,
[Amit Varma]: you know, lynchings are on the rise. You have talk of, you know, I mean, things like love
[Amit Varma]: jihad and all were issues in the 1920s, for God's sake, and they are back. I had an episode
[Amit Varma]: a while back with Akar Patel on the intellectual foundations of Hindutva, which in retrospect,
[Amit Varma]: I think both of us said things which were rather naive. But one of the points he made
[Amit Varma]: in that was that it seems to him that a lot of Hindutva, it seems to be again, like you
[Amit Varma]: pointed out about the other, it's directed at someone, you know, whether it's cow slaughter
[Amit Varma]: directed at Muslims, whether it's UCC directed at Muslims or at appeasement of the Muslims
[Amit Varma]: that the Congress carried out. And that allegation, of course, is correct. But it's all about
[Guest]: the other. What are the positive things that this I think, I think, you know, the the best
[Guest]: writings of Savarkar or Shamprasad. It's not about the other at all. It's about reforming
[Guest]: and consolidating Hindus. It's very little reference to the other actually. Hindutva
[Amit Varma]: has a fair amount of reference to it. I mean, I've read it and but the emphasis is really
[Guest]: let's fix ourselves. Let Hindus get, you know, Sangatan within Hindus that let's let's get
[Guest]: rid of caste. Let's get rid of egregious. That's the emphasis. The other part is kind
[Guest]: of there, but it's not and it can always become bigger. The question is, if it becomes bigger,
[Guest]: what are the risks? What are the dangers? There's two others. There's not I don't believe
[Guest]: there's only one other. One other is the West. Because when you reject English and Macaulay
[Guest]: Putras, and when you reject a lot of those things, you are saying that we will be a kind
[Guest]: of a Hindu thing without recourse to any interaction dependence with the West. And the other is
[Guest]: Muslim. I think the second one, post 911, has gotten a little confused with also this
[Guest]: jihadism and international terrorism, and of course, Pakistan sponsored terrorism and
[Guest]: so on. So that's become a very confused area of of dealing with it. And I don't think anybody
[Guest]: has the right answers. I just saw the other day that there is a head of some Christian
[Guest]: association in Kerala was written a long letter about love jihad saying, it's all about Christian
[Guest]: girls who are being trapped in love jihad. So this is now, you know, and the attack on
[Guest]: the Christian churches in Sri Lanka and so on. This has become a bit of a difficult thing
[Guest]: to deal with. One can only hope and I've mentioned that there are some good signs. There are
[Guest]: some lots of worrisome signs, some good signs. Modi being the chief guest at the International
[Guest]: Sufi Convention in Delhi. He is being very prominent in the Bori Convention in Indore.
[Guest]: And if you noticed, in this Houston thing, there was a large number of bodies in that
[Guest]: traditional attire. So Bori NRIs also obviously are being courted as part of this. I think
[Guest]: there is a need to make that connect. And I think the most promising area, which I hope
[Guest]: they will, is music. Because music is an area where there has been a lot of kind of commingling
[Guest]: and a lot of emergence of a band of brothers spirit across Hindus and Muslims, not just
[Guest]: within Hindus or within Muslims. It has been one of those things. We have in Tamil a song,
[Guest]: Patum Nane, Bhavumum Nane. I am the song. I am the bhava. I am the feeling in the song.
[Guest]: I am the person who has made you, the singer, sing. So this is Shiva, who is the lord of
[Guest]: Madurai city. And we believe that still, if you are a good devoted person, you can still
[Guest]: see, suddenly get to see Shiva in Madurai city. He is always there. So he is singing
[Guest]: this song. And the person who wrote this, this is a 1970s, 60s, 70s song, is a guy called
[Guest]: Kamu Sharif, a Muslim lyricist and poet. So my point is, if you can go to the Sufi Convention,
[Guest]: then you should now also push along these things. Because otherwise, the narrative,
[Guest]: including what is bothering me, is international. It is no longer just an Indian problem. It's
[Guest]: got international dimensions in terms of this othering, that we need to, and I am hopeful.
[Guest]: I somehow feel that the two countries where we might also get constructive response from
[Guest]: Muslim intellectuals will be India and Indonesia, where they will come up with new pathbreaking
[Guest]: ways to reach out to create band of brothers, affinities. I am very intrigued by this Pasmandha
[Guest]: Muslim movement. You know about it?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: This is a movement in UP and Bihar of OBC Muslims. So they want to, so in a sense, they
[Guest]: want, they're saying these Ashraf, you know, Arab, Persian descent, light complexion, Muslim
[Guest]: aristocracy, they have not helped us. They've just, you know, taken care of their sinecures.
[Guest]: So let us do our own movement, look for reservations, which is what everybody in India looks for
[Guest]: and a few other goodies. But in the process, what are they doing? They are admitting that
[Guest]: they are converts of OBC castes, which is what in fact, the Hindutva people want them
[Guest]: to admit. So it is happening maybe for a totally different reason. But it's, so I am this girl
[Guest]: Salma who writes, she's a Tamil feminist writer. She's a Muslim feminist writer. Very interesting.
[Guest]: So there are things like that that are happening, which give me a sense of optimism. But yes,
[Guest]: we could, the descent from high watermark 1930 to 1940 was just 10 years. It doesn't
[Guest]: take very long. If you, if you make a few wrong choices, you could, hopefully again,
[Guest]: that's the constitution. It is it's the inherent good sense of the Indian people which will
[Amit Varma]: prevail.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of the great lessons of the 20th century was that one must be able to tell
[Amit Varma]: the difference between an ideology in its utopian form, as you've pointed out, and what
[Amit Varma]: actually happens. And we've seen that with the Soviet Union, China, Cambodia, or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: where you still have people who defend communism and say that in any theory, but practice where
[Amit Varma]: they implemented it wrong. So my question to you then is, let's look at this school
[Amit Varma]: of conservatism, the Bankimchandra school of conservatism with the same scepticism,
[Amit Varma]: and leave aside what are in theory, the sensible aspects of it and look at what's happening
[Amit Varma]: in practice, because what I see in practice is when Modi is a master of optics, what I
[Amit Varma]: see in practice is that in terms of economics, his government is as statist as any government
[Amit Varma]: in our history. In fact, many of the things he's done like demonetization and the botched
[Amit Varma]: implementation of GST feels like it's right out of Indira Gandhi's book, I always say
[Guest]: he's her successor.
[Guest]: This is where I keep making the argument, we need to appeal to the non statist free
[Guest]: market elements within the BJP. Because there are Luddite elements also, they don't want
[Guest]: modern technology, but they don't want GM crops. There's there's a whole lot of elements
[Guest]: within this broad umbrella of Hindu nationalism, which we need to neutralize and appeal to
[Guest]: those elements which are, that's why I said if you read that again, there is something
[Guest]: about technical thing, chic contemporary edge. Now, this meeting with Facebook, this interested
[Guest]: in Silicon Valley, these are the things that we need to push.
[Guest]: It's very tough, it's very tough to push it because the other side which wants GM crops
[Guest]: to be banned, which wants no privatization, they have their, you know, they're playing
[Guest]: the same game of using their thing. And, but it's a tough one. In general, it's been disappointing
[Guest]: that this dispensation has not been as market friendly, I think, as many of us expected
[Amit Varma]: it to be.
[Amit Varma]: And I didn't really even finish my question, because the second part of the first part,
[Amit Varma]: of course, is an economics have been completely statist, not even just as market friendly
[Amit Varma]: as you and I would have liked, but literally Indira Gandhi level statist. But also in terms
[Amit Varma]: of society, our society is being polarized very deeply. And I don't think that's an exaggeration
[Amit Varma]: by what is really going on.
[Guest]: I think it's an exaggeration. In my travels, I don't see, I think it's a very Bombay Delhi
[Guest]: view. When I travel around the country, I don't see any great change from the past.
[Guest]: And I really, you know, wonder if in fact, there is extraordinary new levels of violence
[Guest]: or new levels of tension, because it seems to me pretty much the same as it was before.
[Guest]: And it's India's never been an easy country to govern. And it's never been a nonviolent
[Guest]: country despite Mahatma Gandhi's best efforts. So it's there, but it's I don't the narrative
[Guest]: that somehow it has gone up dramatically in the last five, six years, I, I'm very sceptical
[Guest]: of that narrative. For instance, take this some guy has gone to a magistrate and gotten
[Guest]: some sedition case against some writers in some obscure court in Bihar. Now, this kind
[Guest]: of thing has been happening in India for the last 80 years. It's not new.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I have in fact written about the sedition law in columns long before this government
[Amit Varma]: came to power. But I think we'll agree to disagree. Because I think if you just look
[Amit Varma]: at the number of the lynching numbers, for example, and the way that the discourse has
[Amit Varma]: been so polarized and has become so shrill, I think, but we can agree to disagree.
[Guest]: I don't know, I think maybe I have a longer memory or whatever. But have you heard of
[Guest]: Kela Venmani? No. Kela Venmani in 1968, 40 odd Dalit agricultural workers were burnt
[Guest]: alive in a, in a hut in Thanjavur district. Now, these kinds of things have been there
[Guest]: and no one was punished, by the way. Commission of inquiry came up with some total anodyne
[Guest]: report. And this is under a DMK government, not even a Congress government. I'm not, not,
[Guest]: this is the, the, the, the, I remember so many of these things and I say Maliana, Meerut,
[Guest]: Moradabad. In fact, this fellow who has now become governor of Kerala, what's his name?
[Guest]: Arif Mohammad Khan. He makes an interesting statement. I was watching him on YouTube the
[Guest]: other day. There have been no riots for some time. That's his perspective, you know, but
[Guest]: which is actually interesting. You want to measure by riots. It's kind of horrifying
[Guest]: idea because you know, the moment you say these things, you'll have one. It's kind of
[Amit Varma]: scary, but. We'll leave this particular issue there. Let the listener decide. I've taken
[Amit Varma]: a lot of your time. So I'll end with sort of a couple of more questions. One question
[Amit Varma]: is that once you get into politics, your imperatives, your incentives drive you in a particular direction.
[Amit Varma]: And typically what happens is you're driven by the will to power. For example, Amit Shah
[Amit Varma]: is of course a master political strategist and the way he's done his mergers and acquisitions
[Amit Varma]: got politicians from all parties, regardless of their founding ideology, the way he's put
[Amit Varma]: together caste coalitions, you know, going after non-Yadav OBCs and non-Jatav Dalits
[Amit Varma]: and so on and you'll be very masterful, but driven by the will to power and not by any
[Amit Varma]: ideology per se. So then the question is that given that political imperatives leave you
[Amit Varma]: with only one aim, which is what is the best way to come to power and nothing else matters,
[Amit Varma]: not issues of virtue, or what is the right thing to do, or what is good for society,
[Amit Varma]: but simply how do I win the next election? Is that something that you see as a problem?
[Guest]: And isn't that a more core? It is. It would be a complete violation of the principles
[Guest]: of Rajadharma. Thiruvalluvar certainly would not have approved of it. But all that is theory,
[Guest]: right? No, why? I mean, I mean, ruling righteously is not theory. Who has ruled righteously?
[Guest]: I mean, I don't like the word rule because they should serve, but who has ruled righteously?
[Guest]: Not perfectly. Look, you go back to the American Constitution. They are saying more perfect
[Guest]: union. They're not saying the perfect union. We are not saying that we can get it all correct.
[Guest]: But the intention and the attempt has to be in the direction of righteousness and not
[Guest]: in the direction of pure pursuit of power. And that is that is a danger. It's a danger
[Guest]: that all kings, all quasi kings, would be kings, wannabe kings are tempted by. And in
[Guest]: that process, will they adopt means that are not just moderately bad, but extremely bad?
[Guest]: That's the question you're asking, right? And we've seen this again and again and again
[Guest]: in democratic politics when somebody says, yeah, that might be a good idea, but it's
[Guest]: not a vote winner. Oh, that's a vote loser. Forget it. You know, this idea that we will
[Guest]: only pursue vote winners and discard vote losers is in and of itself not bad. But when
[Guest]: you then say, I don't mind pursuing vote winners, but I'll do it through bribery, chauvinism,
[Guest]: corruption, violence, that's when it becomes it becomes a problem. I don't think we've
[Guest]: gotten there. The country is not there. Could it get there? I doubt it.
[Amit Varma]: No, in the sense that we had something like demonetization, which was horrible economics,
[Amit Varma]: but good politics and carried out for political reasons, because the calculation was that
[Amit Varma]: one your opposition parties funds get stunted and to the sense of schadenfreude that the
[Amit Varma]: poor feel about the rich suffering more than them will help them win the next UP election.
[Guest]: And it was a landslide.
[Guest]: You know, again, I mean, we, after the fact, it looks, if they had lost, we'd have said
[Guest]: demonetization caused them the loss. My point is, after these electoral analysis, but why
[Guest]: somebody wins or loses after the fact.
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree with you. My point of bringing this up was to say that the impetus behind
[Amit Varma]: a particular that particular economic policy and my contention is, for most economic policies
[Guest]: that get carried out by the government is a political impetus, not an economic impetus.
[Guest]: That is correct. And that's that is the nature of democracy. I don't think you can stand
[Guest]: up in Britain and say NHS is inefficient. You will lose. It doesn't matter whether you're
[Guest]: conservative or Labour or whatever. So yes, ultimately, in a democracy, politics predominates
[Guest]: and not economics. And that has been one of the sadder things about the 1991 reforms,
[Guest]: is that it wasn't sold to the people as something that's good to this day. I don't think it's
[Guest]: economic reform or movement towards markets has been sold by anyone.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's remarkable that actually the best thing in terms of policy that happened
[Amit Varma]: to this country, which got 300 million people out of poverty, is something that Rahul Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: actually disowns, and wants to walk back to earlier socialist times, which kept millions
[Guest]: in poor, which is, you know, the state of the opposition is so dismal.
[Guest]: Because I think the politics of patronage may be very important for their votes. Right.
[Guest]: In other words, you know, exactly the point I was making, I made this point many years
[Guest]: ago, to one of my friends of the Congress. I'm talking about 20-30 years ago, not now.
[Guest]: I said, yeah, as far as I can make out, the less educated a person is, the less wealthy
[Guest]: a person is, other things being equal, caste, gender, etc. The more likely that person is
[Guest]: to work for Congress party. Therefore, I said, you guys have a vested interest in keeping
[Guest]: people less educated and less wealthy. I mean, stupid reverse causality, I admit, it's not
[Guest]: a good argument. But I was making it for effect to say, these are very complicated things.
[Guest]: They don't, for instance, would you want Hispanic Americans to get integrated? If you are a
[Guest]: Democratic Party leader in America, probably not, you want to highlight their separateness,
[Guest]: because then they'll vote for you. Otherwise, they might vote Republican. So these are some
[Guest]: very complicated things. And it's a curse of democracy, that we have to deal with these
[Guest]: things. I think economic reform, we have to keep fighting for it on only two, three basis.
[Guest]: One, it is morally the right thing to do, Raja Dharma, not to interfere in economic
[Guest]: activities of your citizens. Two, consequentially, all these Asian countries who adopted it have
[Guest]: done better than us. Therefore, you will do better. And three, if a constituency keeps
[Guest]: getting built for it, which is still very small, presumably, and not a constituency
[Guest]: for freebies, I think you might, but the third one is very tough. It's very tough. Politics
[Guest]: always trumps economics. And also they look at the facts. Fact is Nassim Rao lost. Fact
[Guest]: is Vajpayee lost. You know, hey, wait a minute, probably our two best Prime Ministers. Wait
[Guest]: a minute, you know, economic reform, Vajpayee did the maximum amount of privatizations,
[Guest]: even added disinvestment ministry. He lost. So the conclusion you come to, it's a very
[Guest]: strange conclusion, but you come to it that, hey, you know, the voters are supreme. And
[Guest]: how does one deal with that? Democracy is not an unmixed blessing. It has its problems,
[Guest]: as Churchill says, it's better than other systems, but it's not necessarily a very good
[Amit Varma]: system.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. Now, I'll let you go shortly. I'll release you from the fetters of this
[Amit Varma]: drab podcast recording studio. But before I ask my final question, I just want a word
[Amit Varma]: for my listeners. I had four pages of notes for this episode, and I'm through just two
[Amit Varma]: of them. Among the things we could not discuss is the development of Islam in India, how
[Amit Varma]: much of it was around conservative lines, how much was not. Jerry's assertion that Jinnah
[Amit Varma]: started off as a conservative and ended as a radical. Then there are a couple of really
[Amit Varma]: good chapters on culture, on society, on aesthetics and education. So the book is far richer than
[Amit Varma]: this, even this episode might have given you a sense of so please to go out and buy the
[Amit Varma]: book. But now for my last question, which is a question I ask all my guests about whatever
[Guest]: the subject is. Can I come in for one minute? Particularly the culture section, I think
[Guest]: is something that I spent a fair amount of time and effort on. Because the problem in
[Guest]: today's academia, both in North America and in England and in the continent and in India,
[Guest]: is that it's dominated by Marxist postmodernists and Freudians, who have kind of dismissed
[Guest]: the idea of an Indian culture as upper caste, hegemonic, patriarchal, this, that and the
[Guest]: other using their vocabulary that postmodernists like, which I don't understand, and I choose
[Guest]: not to understand. And I've taken a very comprehensive and a very head on attack on that, in defending
[Guest]: the idea of an Indian culture. So I do hope readers will get to that and spend time on
[Amit Varma]: that. Now, come on your question. Yeah, my final question is, speaking as a conservative,
[Amit Varma]: what gives you hope? And what gives you despair about the next 20 years in India?
[Guest]: What gives me hope? I think, basically, the residual Marxism residual socialism, as an
[Guest]: intellectually coherent and respectable doctrine will go away. There is still left. I think
[Guest]: it will go away. That gives me hope. Because as long as it exists, it's always a danger
[Guest]: and a bad thing. I think in the economics area, either because of a crisis or whatever
[Guest]: reason, the philosophy of supporting markets and being market friendly, will willy nilly
[Guest]: reassert itself. I think Indian culture is thriving. On that score, I'm quite positive.
[Guest]: I think Indian social change is going along fairly okay lines. There are issues like Sabarimala
[Guest]: and so on, which kind of distract us. But in general, it is it is moving along the directions.
[Guest]: Now what am I worried about? I think one worry is that we continue to not recognize, intellectually
[Guest]: at least, in sufficient numbers, the continuity in our history, particularly the importance
[Guest]: of the British Raj as an important, constructive, positive intervention in Indian history. If
[Guest]: we don't, then we run the risk of doing stupid things. And that is a big risk that worries
[Guest]: me again. And I see it in our neighboring states. I see it in Myanmar. I see it in Sri
[Guest]: Lanka. I see it in Pakistan. I see it in all of the former colonies of the British in Africa.
[Guest]: And Naipaul talks about it when he talks about mimic men. You know, what does he say? That's
[Guest]: what he's talking about. The jettisoning of that is and it could happen. It could happen
[Guest]: because there is so little understanding and so little defense of it. In fact, the most
[Guest]: popular books recently in Indian history have been attacking Robert Clive and attacking
[Guest]: East India Company without, you know, and very popular, immensely popular among Indians,
[Guest]: middle classes and upwardly middle class. That worries me. That's a big worry I have.
[Guest]: Then I do have a concern that which you expressed that, you know, essentially we have moved
[Guest]: far ahead politically without moving sufficiently economically or socially. The same issues
[Guest]: that Rana Dey raised 120 years ago. Please let us not go for, you know, quick political
[Guest]: freedom without concomitant economic and social change. That is still the curse that we are
[Guest]: living with. And that means you never know. We could have some very strange and bizarre
[Guest]: political behavior. And we should always be very careful. The First Republic of India
[Guest]: is 69 years old, yes. And, you know, it is very important that we collectively say, hey,
[Guest]: we want to be around in the same fashion more or less 69 years from now. And 1776 to 1860
[Guest]: was how many years? 84 years. A major crisis happened in the history of the other great
[Guest]: constitutional republic that we are aware of. So those these are dangerous times in
[Guest]: the history of any republic. We are no longer young. We're a middling, middle aged republic.
[Guest]: And middle age is when, you know, as you know, cholesterol and diabetes and all these things
[Guest]: hit people. And that could be true for a society, too. So that gives me sleepless nights.
[Amit Varma]: On these wise words, Jerry, thank you so much for coming on the show. I learned a lot reading
[Amit Varma]: your book and talking to you. Thank you, sir.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, hop on over to your nearest bookstore online or
[Amit Varma]: offline and pick up The Indian Conservative by Jayatirthrao, better known as Jerry Rao.
[Amit Varma]: You can't unfortunately follow him on Twitter or Instagram or any such thing because the
[Amit Varma]: man very wisely is not on social media. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com. The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution,
[Amit Varma]: an independent think tank based in Bangalore. The Takshashila Institution has postgraduate
[Amit Varma]: courses in public policy starting January. So do check them out. Hop on over to takshashila.org.in
[Amit Varma]: for more details. Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: How many times have you caught yourself googling stuff on health and wondering if it's the
[Unknown]: right information? How many times have you heard different health experts give opposing
[Unknown]: views, which has only left you confused? There are rising cases of cancer, heart, diabetes,
[Unknown]: stress, and autoimmune diseases. Meet the patients and the experts who paved the path
[Unknown]: of true healing. Join me, Rachna Chachi, cancer nutrition coach and nutritional therapist
[Unknown]: on Heal and Hearty. I take you through my own journey of recovery from an incurable
[Unknown]: disease and the journey of so many others who healed only via nutrition and holistic
[Unknown]: healing. Find the answers you seek for what's good for your health and what's good for your
[Unknown]: soul. You can listen to us on the IBM podcast app or ibmpodcast.com. Don't forget your date
[Unknown]: with good health.
[Unknown]: Advertising is dead. Yep, you heard me right. Advertising is dead. We're all in the content
[Unknown]: business now. Let's not call it news, TV, radio, etc, etc. It's all content. And we're
[Unknown]: in the middle of this weirdly exciting phase where all the borders and lines that have
[Unknown]: been drawn over decades has been swept away by this lovely thing called the internet.
[Unknown]: We're a show where we don't dwell on just the stuff that is now but rather the wider
[Unknown]: stuff about advertising, media, content, and the whole goddamn circus surrounding it. Tune
[Unknown]: in every Tuesday for a weekly unboxing of the mystery box we used to call advertising.
[Unknown]: I'm Varun Duggirala, co-founder and content chief at The Glitch. And this is my new podcast.
[Unknown]: Advertising is dead.